DIVISION 00 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 1
DIVISION 00 PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING
REQUIREMENTS
Coordinate with Program Management Office Governance Documents.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 3
DIVISION 01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SUSTAINABILITY AND RESILIENCE PERFORMANCE
REQUIREMENTS
Sustainability and Resiliency (S+R) Objectives
With the exception of individual building projects required to pursue certification proving compliance with
the federally mandated Guiding Principles (see Section 01 33 29, Sustainability and Resiliency Reporting,
and A-GRAM 17-01 February 2017, available on the Whole Building Design Guide website for more
information), Tyndall Air Force Base (AFB) will not pursue any additional third-party certifications
associated with site or building projects. As previously mentioned, however, criteria from other leading
sustainability- and resiliency-focused rating systems, regional and agency best practices, and various
findings from case studies and reports have been incorporated as appropriate based on their applicability
to the Tyndall AFB context. Nearly every section of the existing Pre-Final Tyndall AFB Installation
Facilities Standards (IFS) (05 November 2018) has been enhanced, and new criteria have been further
improved through a general S+R lens. Numerous topics are interwoven throughout the Divisions as
applicable to both horizontal and vertical projects types.
Division 01 contains requirements that apply to projects as a whole and clarifications on design and
construction processes, documentation and reporting, overarching material and product requirements and
recommendations, health, safety, and quality, and performance and commissioning requirements.
Divisions 02 through 48 contain specific criteria as applicable to each topic. The introductions of each
Division list the sustainability and resiliency measures addressed within and additionally refer the reader
back to Division 01 as appropriate for applicable material and product requirements as well as concepts
that may involve multiple disciplines and/or Divisions.
Installation of the Future Resiliency Focused Measures
General
• Hardened design for extreme rain, wind, sea level rise, storm surge, and other extreme weather
• Adaptive design for future severe weather conditions, exacerbated by climate change
• Resilient landscapes leveraging the adaptability of natural systems
• Adequate horizontal spacing from forested areas to mitigate fire hazard
• Use of non-corrosive “resilient” materials such as stainless-steel and carry a Florida Product Approval
Notice of Acceptance (NOA) in areas subject to salt water and/or salt air exposure
Buildings
• Elevate building and critical infrastructure above adopted design flood elevation
• Dry floodproofing building openings such as windows and vents
• Elevate or make watertight/submersible enclosures for electrical and mechanical systems and
connections
• Flood barriers at existing building penetrations/flood pathways below the Tyndall AFB Design Flood
Elevation (DFE) memorandum (USAF, 2019a), provided in Attachment 1
• Establish grading requirements for buildings to ensure proper runoff away from building
• Reduce life-cycle impact for renovation projects and new construction
• Resilient roof with adequate wind load resistance
• Resilient building foundations
• Consider future needs; flexible/adaptive design, long-term adaptability
• Increase wind speeds for select Risk Category based on the Tyndall AFB Design Wind Speed and
Building Envelope Protection memorandum (USAF, 2019b), provided in Attachment 2
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
4 04 November 2019
Domestic Water, Fire Water, Wastewater
• Use of backup wells as a backup source of domestic water and replenishing fire water storage
• Elevate or make watertight/submersible enclosures for electrical and mechanical systems and
connections
• Connect multiple taps to the municipal water main
• Retrofit sanitary lift stations to protect against high velocity winds and storm surge
• Provide lift stations with redundant pumps and hookups for backup power diesel generators
Electric Distribution and Communication Utilities
• Underground utility distribution to avoid damage from high winds
• Concrete-encased polyvinyl chloride (PVC) conduit duct banks to provide great survivability
• SMART routers and switches to manage traffic and load balancing
• Backup power generators, uninterruptible power supplies, and power conditioning to all network
termination equipment
• Multiple fiber paths for connectivity for each building and network management node
• Self-forming, self-healing network enclaves that automatically provide service to primary and critical
activities in the event of major outage
• Automated routing protocols provide priority to critical services and mission support elements
• Logical and physical redundant loops of fiber backbone capacity throughout the service areas
• Multiple paths of special circuits and satellite connectivity for continuity of operations outside the
Installation network
• Public Safety communications provided on multiple data systems and standalone platforms
• External data and communications service redundancy provided via 5G wireless connectivity
• Grid power: performance monitoring, interruption tracking, damage and exposure prevention,
distribution redundancy and auto restoration, demand-side management, and demand response
Transportation
• Transit and transportation system protection and continuous operations
• Use of swales to convey stormwater from roadway to drainage system or outfall
• Cross section of road will be designed to be traversable at least for one direction of traffic immediately
following storm events
• Hardened roads will be designed to minimize damage from storm events and extend roadway
lifespan
• Parking designed to have minimal raised median curbs and tire stops so they can be used as
temporary staging space during a response event
• Maintain emergency vehicle assess during peak rainfall events
Stormwater Management System
• Provide stormwater management for future rainfall events and considering implications of sea
level rise
• Enhanced flood mitigation including overland pathways for extreme rain events
• Gravity flow stormwater system, no pumping or valve operation
Installation of the Future Sustainability Focused Measures
General
• Integrative design process
• Adaptive design for extreme rain, wind, sea rise, storm surge, and extreme weather
• Hardscape materials and heat island reduction
• Improved safety, access, and wayfinding
• Enhanced public (shared) space and amenities
• Support of mental restoration, physical activity, and social connection
• Consideration of future needs; flexibility of design, long-term adaptability
• Low-impact development
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 5
• Life-cycle impact reduction for renovation projects
• Life-cycle impact reduction for new construction
• Energy-efficiency and onsite and/or neighborhood renewable energy with storage
• Reduced energy and water use
• Diverted waste from landfills, reduce excavated soils taken from site
• Options for establishing passive thermal safety/habitable temperatures
• Context-sensitive project delivery
• Minimization of construction impacts: pollution, light, noise, vibration, safety, wayfinding
• Support of local economy, social equity in construction team
• Communication of sustainable construction requirements and recommendations
• Reduced construction energy and water consumption
• Sustainable procurement practices
• Field quality assurance inspections
• Enhanced commissioning, measurement, and verification
• Planning for component or project end-of-life
• Planning for operational monitoring and maintenance
Buildings
• Resilient building foundations, openings (doors and windows) and roofs
• Building-level demand response
• Safer, non-toxic infrastructure and building materials
• Short- and long-term emission control of building materials
• Avoidance of chemicals of concern
• Energy, water, and moisture metering and monitoring
• Persistent bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) source reduction of mercury, lead, cadmium, and copper
(lamps, piping, connections)
• Inclusive design (accessibility and Universal Design)
• Energy-efficient laboratory systems
• Safe containment in laboratories
• Visual and physical ergonomics
• Active furnishings
• Exterior and interior lighting quality and controllability
• Daylighting and views in occupied and non-occupied spaces
Domestic Water, Fire Water, Wastewater
• Outdoor water use reduction and non-potable sources
• Water quality and consistency
• Refrigerant and water leak detection and prevention
Electric Distribution and Communication Utilities
• Flood protection for electrical and mechanical systems and connections
• Grid power: performance monitoring, interruption tracking, damage and exposure prevention,
distribution redundancy and auto restoration, demand-side management, and demand response
Transportation
• Traffic emissions reduction; green vehicle amenities
• Community connectivity, walkability, and non-motorized transit
Stormwater Management System
• Protection of surface and groundwater quality
• Stormwater quality and quantity management
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
6 04 November 2019
Site and Land Management
• Rainwater harvesting, resilient landscapes
• Designation and communication of vegetation and soil protection zones
• Quality public access areas at waterfronts, connectivity to pathways and greenways
Environmental, Coastal, and Biodiversity Management
• Integrative design process
• Protection of floodplain functions and aquatic ecosystems
• Long-term management of biodiversity
• Rainwater harvesting, resilient landscapes
• Enhance wetland and surface water functions
• Control of invasive species, using native or adaptive species
• Acceptable site lighting for coastal and wetland areas
• Light pollution reduction (non-coastal)
• Environmental tobacco smoke control
• Legionella risk management
• Restoration of post-construction disturbed areas
Air Quality
• Designation and communication of vegetation and soil protection zones
• Energy, water, and moisture metering and monitoring
• Reduction of greenhouse gas and air pollutant emissions
• PBT source reduction of mercury, lead, cadmium, and copper (lamps, piping, connections)
• Inclusive design (accessibility and Universal Design)
• Reduced net embodied energy and carbon, water, and toxins; low carbon design
• Reduced energy and water use
• Combustion minimization
• Water quality and consistency
• Legionella risk management
• Enhanced indoor environmental quality (air, light, sound, thermal comfort)
• Microbe and mold control in heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems
• Mold prevention in building materials
• Visual and physical ergonomics
• Active furnishings
• Diverted waste from landfills, reduce excavated soils taken from site
• Options for establishing passive thermal safety/habitable temperatures
• Exterior and interior lighting quality and controllability
• Daylighting and views in occupied and non-occupied spaces
• Context-sensitive project delivery
• Minimization of construction impacts: pollution, light, noise, vibration, safety, wayfinding
• Indoor air quality before occupancy
Sustainability Leadership and Management
Project teams are better able to serve the community when led and managed by people and
organizations that have a strong commitment to the principles of sustainability and resiliency and have
demonstrated the ability to effectively incorporate these principles into projects.
All qualifying projects must have an individual dedicated to enforcing and tracking sustainability and
resiliency requirements on both the design and construction teams. For vertical projects, qualifying
projects are those that meet the Compliance Requirement/Thresholds prescribed in Table 1-1 of the
applicable version of Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable
Building Requirements. Horizontal projects qualify if they impact 5,000 square feet or more. Projects not
meeting the minimum thresholds may choose between having a dedicated S+R Coordinator, or having
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 7
the project’s Design Quality Manager and Contractor Quality Control (CQC) Manager provide the roles,
with approval from the Tyndall AFB Program Management Office (PMO).
For all qualifying projects, the S+R Coordinators must have at least 5 contiguous years of S+R
experience applicable to the project type. Depending on the project type and scope, design and/or
construction teams may operate effectively with one S+R Coordinator per project phase; for larger or
more complex projects, multiple coordinators may be needed. The individual(s) will guide the project team
through the design and construction phases, interfacing with each other throughout the project timeline to
ensure compliance and continuity. The S+R Coordinators must also work with the CQC Manager and the
Tyndall AFB PMO throughout the life of the project to ensure full compliance and accountability. The S+R
Coordinator can be a subconsultant to the design and/or construction team if desired or if no suitable
individual exists within the respective organizations.
Section 01 33 29, Sustainability and Resiliency Reporting, provides a complete list of components that
will constitute each project’s Sustainability and Resiliency Management Plan (SRMP). In additional to
general relevant project guidance, the S+R Coordinators must provide, compile, organize, and maintain
the SRMP throughout the project until final turnover to the Tyndall AFB PMO.
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND GOALS
Energy Performance
The efficient use of electrical energy is critical to resilience and sustainability. Efficiency provides
economic and environmental benefits in normal operations. During events like power outages, efficiency
facilitates passive survivability through the reduced requirement for onsite generation of electricity.
Designing for Best In Class energy performance through an integrative design approach is required as a
key criterion to providing resilience and sustainability.
Vertical projects must comply with Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 10 Part 433, Energy
Efficiency Standards for New Federal Commercial and Multi-Family High-Rise Residential Buildings’
Baseline Standards (Update 6 Nov 2015). “Commercial” buildings must be designed to achieve energy
consumption levels that are a minimum of 30% less than the consumption levels of ASHRAE Standard
90.1-2013 (or version currently adopted by the USAF) baseline building, as required by UFC 1-200-02,
High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements. Design teams must strive for the best
possible, life cycle cost-effective energy performance, which may be significantly better than 30% below
the ASHRAE 90.1 baseline. Project teams should verify energy performance in accordance with Section
01 91 00, Commissioning.
As required by UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements, Federal lowrise
residential buildings must be designed and constructed in compliance with the International Code
Council (ICC), International Energy Conservation Code (IECC). The building must be designed to achieve
at least 30% energy consumption reduction from the IECC baseline using the Simulated Performance
Alternative found in IECC Section 405.
Install metering and advanced metering devices in accordance with U.S. Department of Energy Metering
Guidance (November 2014) or subsequent updates. Electricity metering must be in conformance with Air
Force Instruction (AFI) 32-1061, as noted in Section 26 27 13, Electricity Metering. Energy metering will
be installed for the building’s whole-building energy sources as well as any individual energy end-use that
represents 10% or more of the total annual consumption of the building. Meters must have the following
characteristics:
• Meters must be permanently installed, record at intervals of one hour or less, and transmit data to a
remote location.
• Electricity meters must record both consumption and demand. Whole-building electricity meters
should record the power factor, if appropriate.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
8 04 November 2019
• The data collection system must use a local area network, building automation system, wireless
network, or comparable communication infrastructure.
• The system must be capable of storing all meter data for at least 36 months.
• The data must be remotely accessible.
• All meters in the system must be capable of reporting hourly, daily, monthly, and annual energy use.
Best-In-Class energy performance can be achieved and should include the following components:
• Reduced operating costs through reduced energy consumption
• Enhanced resilience through reduced demand for energy and water
• Enhanced resilience through passive survivability
• Downsized emergency generator and fuel storage equipment
• More durable buildings
• Improved occupant comfort and productivity
• Significantly reduced greenhouse gas emissions
• Simplification of powering buildings with renewable energy and energy storage
• Mitigation of the risk of future energy cost volatility
• Reduced maintenance burden through simplification of systems.
• Mitigation of the risk of future climate changes such as greater peak cooling loads
Tyndall AFB is in Climate Zone 2A, and it is cooling dominated. ASHRAE research and publications
indicate that a target Energy Use Intensity at Tyndall AFB can be 22 thousand British thermal units per
square foot (kBtu/ft2) per year, site energy, for a typical office building. Allowances can be made for the
type of building, hours of operation, and USAF-driven process loads, but this is where Best-In-Class
energy performance starts, and it is the baseline for energy performance.
The specified level of energy performance must be achieved through the use of integrated design
strategies where all design, construction, and operations personnel think of the building as a system, not
as individual components. This requirement aligns with the criteria set forth in UFC 1-200-02, High
Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements (see the Integrative Process section that follows
for more information. Interdisciplinary solutions must be identified that result in savings that dwarf
component-based efficiencies. Well thought-out, cost-effective, simple-to-maintain strategies must result
in the downsizing of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment, artificial lighting, and
electrical systems to provide low energy performance with a conventional budget. Energy modeling must
be initiated early in the process, and the model must be continually updated as design options are
considered and selected.
To accomplish primary energy consumption reduction, the project design team must perform an analysis
of the proposed building site during the Concept Design stage and identify opportunities for the
implementation of passive design solutions that reduce loads. As a minimum, the passive design analysis
should cover:
• Adaptation to climate change
• Building fabric (such as structural materials, cladding, insulation, and finishes, that enclose the interior
of a building, separating the internal from the external)
• Building form
• Building layout
• Building orientation
• Daylighting strategy
• Microclimate
• Site weather
• Thermal mass or other fabric thermal storage
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 9
Any savings resulting from the incorporation of passive design measures should be demonstrated by
comparing the energy demand, primary energy consumption or carbon dioxide (CO₂) emissions for the
building with and without the proposed passive design measures adopted, as identified in the passive
design analysis.
To enable a baseline for comparison to be established, a “standard building” should be modelled with
fabric performance equivalent to that of the local Building Regulations Notional Building and without the
passive design measures where feasible (that is, building orientation is likely to be fixed).
With the exception of any changes to account for passive design measures and fabric performance, this
“standard building” should be modelled as equivalent to the actual building.
Any savings in energy demand, energy consumption or CO₂ emissions should then be calculated by
comparing the respective outputs from two building models representing the proposed building
specification, and the “standard building” specification.
In summary, the approach to achieving a low-energy-consuming building starts with the building
envelope, where the interior environment is separated from the exterior. Buildings will include high “R”
value, thermally broken, well air-sealed assemblies to minimize the skin load. Hygrothermal analysis
should be included to identify condensation and mold issues as well. Next, the internal loads created by
USAF equipment must be as efficient as possible to minimize the energy requirements. Efficient heating,
cooling, ventilation, and lighting are to be provided only where needed, when needed, and rarely for
unoccupied spaces. Equipment to provide heating, cooling, ventilation, and lighting must be
high-efficiency type, and ventilation requirements should be separated from sensible heating and cooling.
In Tyndall AFB’s climate zone, the cooling load can be expected to represent two thirds of a building’s
energy consumption. Efforts to reduce the cooling loads should include the following considerations:
• Attention to orientation and massing. An east-west orientation significantly contributes to avoiding
unwanted solar gain while providing opportunities for effective daylighting strategies that reduce the
need for artificial lighting.
• A window-to-wall ratio maximum of 30% with reduced glazing on the east and west facades
compared to the north and south facades. Glazing must be well-placed for daylighting and views.
• Appropriate shading of fenestration to prevent solar gain and glare.
• High R-value opaque wall assemblies.
• Continuous exterior insulation to create a thermal break. This includes slabs and foundations, as well
as roofs and wall assemblies. Pay attention to balconies, parapets, and similar.
• Special attention to detailing at intersections of materials or corners to ensure continuity of thermal
break / elimination of thermal bridging, as well as continuity of air barrier from one assembly to
another. Pay attention to balconies, parapets, and similar.
• Incorporating cool roofs.
• A continuous air barrier throughout all six sides of the building. The air barrier should be tested in
accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E779, and the infiltration must
not exceed 0.15 cubic foot per minute per square foot (cfm/ft2) of envelope at 75 Pascals (Pa).
• The lighting power density (LPD) should be no more than 0.4 watt per square foot (ft2) for the overall
building; for individual areas, the wattage per square foot must match the criteria as defined in
ASHRAE/Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) Standard 90.1. Lighting controls—to include
occupancy sensors, photocell control, daylight harvesting, bilevel dimming, and similar—must
minimize power consumption and eliminate lighting of unoccupied spaces. Use task lighting with
vacancy sensors to supplement low ambient light levels.
• Equipment and appliances must be ENERGY STAR rated per UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and
Sustainable Building Requirements, and careful attention must be paid to the reduction of plug loads
through the optimization of office equipment, copy rooms, vending and kitchenettes.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
10 04 November 2019
• Landscaping trees to provide shade, in compliance with antiterrorism/force protection (ATFP)
requirements.
HVAC systems will vary based on building type and size. They must be right-sized to avoid inefficient
operation at part load, and they must be high-efficiency systems. The fact that a high-performance air
barrier and envelope is required gives the HVAC system designer the confidence needed to downsize
systems. Coordinate with Division 07, Thermal and Moisture Protection. Where possible, ventilation
requirements must be decoupled from sensible heating requirements, and energy-recovery ventilation
must be used. Demand controlled ventilation must be used where appropriate, such as in often
unoccupied assembly areas. Focus should be placed on simplifying systems and downsizing equipment
through load reduction. An effort to minimize the maintenance requirements must be included through the
use of simple strategies such as heat pipes for heat recovery. Economizers and free cooling must be
used when possible.
Service water heating loads must be minimized through water conservation. Plumbing fixtures must be
Water Sense labelled with particular attention paid to fixtures using hot water; refer to UFC 1-200-02,
High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements, for additional requirements (see Section 22
40 00, Plumbing Fixtures). Compact plumbing plans must be provided where possible, and efficient
service water heating equipment must be specified.
Design teams for all energy-consuming projects must provide an Energy Conservation Report (ECR) that
summarizes the building’s anticipated energy consumption and describes the energy conservation
measures (ECMs) considered for the project. Descriptions of the ECMs should including relevant
calculations showing anticipated savings as well as the reasoning for any strategies not implemented.
Planning for and tracking of the ECMs will enable Tyndall AFB to expand their energy-saving strategy and
empower successive projects to benefit from a collection of best practices and lessons learned.
Design team must provide the ECR to the S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP and to the
Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
Water-Efficiency Performance
Water efficiency is a key sustainable and resilient design criterion. Efficient water use provides economic
and environmental benefits during normal operations. During resiliency events, when there is an
interruption in potable water supply from Bay County, water efficiency maximizes the potable water
supply in the storage tanks, and the supply from the wells.
Outdoor water efficiency is addressed by UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building
Requirements, which prohibits irrigation using potable water sources. This criterion is repeated in Section
32 80 00, Landscape Irrigation. Indoor water efficiency via fixtures is also addressed in UFC 1-200-02
and is reiterated in Section 22 40 00, Plumbing Fixtures, with additional requirements.
Tyndall AFB is located in the St. Andrew Bay Watershed. To address watershed-level sustainability and
resiliency, project teams are encouraged to evaluate impacts to the watershed and reduce net negative
impacts on fresh water availability and quantity, and also identify measures for making positive
contributions to watershed protection. The St. Andrew Bay Watershed Surface Water Improvement and
Management Plan (Northwest Florida Water Management District, 2000) describes watershed resources
and issues and provides a comprehensive, basin-wide management strategy as the regional guiding
framework.
Design teams must assess the project’s watershed context and the watershed-scale fresh water issues,
including location, type, quantity, rate of recharge, and quality of water resources, as well as source and
impacts of water used and the destination and impacts of wastewater. Bay County’s drinking water
source is the Deer Point Lake Reservoir. Tyndall AFB wastewater is treated at Bay County’s Military Point
Advanced Wastewater Treatment Plant. The Installation’s stormwater surface runoff and treated
wastewater enter St. Andrew Bay downstream of the reservoir. The design team must estimate water
usage and wastewater generation during the life of the project.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 11
Design teams must also develop a Strategic Water Management Plan that includes design features and
technology to reduce, as much as feasible, the identified negative impacts and improve watershed-scale
issues with net-zero impact as the ultimate goal. Strategies that reduce potable water use, reduce the
quantities of stormwater and wastewater, or improve stormwater and wastewater quality treatment will
contribute to the health of St. Andrew Bay.
Sustainable and Resilient Design Requirements
The requirements delineated herein and throughout the Divisions encompass those applicable to both
S+R at Tyndall AFB and are applicable to all project types. These criteria exceed the requirements of the
following sections in the Pre-Final Tyndall AFB IFS (USAF, 2018):
• B.02.3
• C01.1
• C04.1
• C06.1.4
• D.02
• D03.2
• E.01
Project Certification
A standard requirement of all DoD building projects is to comply with UFC 1-200-02, High Performance
and Sustainable Building Requirements for Building Design and Construction. Similarly, UFC 3-201-01,
Civil Engineering, and UFC 3-210-10, Low-Impact Development, address the horizontal project aspects of
vegetation design and stormwater control; these criteria collectively contribute to projects’ required
adherence with the Guiding Principles for Sustainable Federal Buildings. All qualifying USAF projects that
meet the thresholds for required third-party certification as explained in UFC 1-200-02 are additionally
required to pursue Guiding Principles certification through either the Green Building Initiative or the Green
Business Certification Inc. programs. The requirements contained within this appendix do not interfere
with a project’s ability to meet the minimum requirements of either the UFC or the third-party certification
program; rather, the guidelines enhance projects’ resiliency and sustainability from a holistic approach
and exceed nearly every minimum requirement for typical DoD projects. Detailed instructions for meeting
the Guiding Principles and pursuing certification are outlined in the abovementioned UFC and instructions
from the designated third-party certifying entity on a per project basis.
Project Processes
Within this section are requirements that apply to overall project design and do not necessarily lend
themselves to incorporation in individual Divisions. They represent holistic approaches rather than
individual design components. Designers will see some specific mentions within other Divisions; specific
design features may be required that merit a more detailed description in context of other related products
and materials.
Integrative Process
Integrative Process is a requirement of the Guiding Principles for vertical projects; although these
Technical Guidelines are Tyndall AFB-specific, they are applicable to the design strategy for all project
types and expand upon the UFC requirements.
Review the Integrative Process ANSI Consensus National Standard Guide© 2.0 for Design and
Construction of Sustainable Buildings and Communities, which provides step-by-step guidance and a
methodology for improving building design, construction, and operations through a replicable, integrative
process. Also review ASHRAE 189.1 Informative Appendix F (Integrated Design) in accordance with the
requirements of UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements.
Beginning in pre-design and continuing throughout the design phases, identify and use opportunities to
achieve synergies across disciplines and building systems. Use the analyses described below to inform
the Owner’s Project Requirements (OPR), design analysis, design documents, and construction
documents.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
12 04 November 2019
• Form a diverse team of qualified professionals as early as possible.
− Team members must coordinate with one another throughout the life of the project. For optimal
interaction and communication, ensure the project team has multiple face-to-face meetings.
− The integrative design team should include, at minimum, the following roles:
 Owner and/or client
 Professionals knowledgeable in design, construction, and maintenance
 Professionals knowledgeable in sustainable and resilient practices
 Professionals with expertise in vegetation, water, soils, landscape ecology, materials, and
human health and well-being, selected to meet the unique constraints and opportunities of
the project and its site
− Identify project stakeholders and full range of potential site user groups and list the primary and
secondary user groups
− All members of the project team must provide the following documentation:
 Name of each team member and his or her expertise (for example, vegetation, hydrology,
soil, landscape ecology, materials, and human health)
 Role on the project
 If an individual fulfills more than one role on the project, explain how he or she has the
various skill sets or expertise for each
• Develop a collaborative communication process:
− Develop an agreed-upon communication method for team members, which should be
collaborative and allow the viewpoints and perspectives of all members to be fully considered in
the decision-making process
− Designate a team facilitator to be responsible for overseeing and ensuring a collaborative
communication process
− Develop a narrative describing the collaborative communication process:
 List of team members responsible for facilitating collaborative communication
 Signatures from all team members who participated in the collaborative communication
process
 Attach meeting minutes from all team meetings
• Identify project S+R principles and performance goals:
− Identify the principles and performance goals of the project (both short- and long- term) and
include an associated timeline and specific performance measures for each goal to determine
when it has been achieved
− Designate specific team members to track project goals throughout the development process:
 Identify project stakeholders
 Identify the full range of potential site users; list the primary and secondary user groups
• Incorporate the S+R principles and performance goals into a program:
− Design and construction teams must develop a program plan that at minimum includes the
following information:
 The unique characteristics, opportunities, and constraints of the site
 General project parameters, such as the scope, budget, implementation schedule, purpose,
and design intent of the project
 A diagram or description of the intended function, arrangement, and relationship of desired
features and their approximate dimensions
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 13
For all project types, perform a preliminary resiliency analysis before the completion of schematic design
that identifies potential physical and procedural actions that can be taken by the project to prepare for and
mitigate short- and long-term hazards to the building, occupants, physical property, and physical
infrastructure. System diversity and redundancy should be considered and accounted for in the approach.
There is preference for ecologically based resiliency approaches over a hardened infrastructure
approach. Explore shock-resistant planning and design for extreme weather events/heat waves along
with ongoing adaptation to increasing ambient temperatures, sea level rise and flood intensity, water
security, energy security, transportation access, and local self-reliance. Planning and design interventions
should result in complementary systems and technics that have low demands for and/or produce water
and energy, while supporting biodiversity that offers stabilizing levels of redundancy/back-up,
local/regional self-reliance and development capacity, and shock resistance and recovery potential.
The study must consider damage impacts within the immediate project boundary and relevant
surrounding areas along with the disruption of essential services that may become unavailable including,
but not limited to electricity, water, sewer, security and fire department services. Opportunities for
cooperative action with surrounding facilities or Installation-wide systems must be identified as a means
of mitigation. Those opportunities will vary depending on the project location.
Safe and resilient issues reflecting site, local, regional hazards and opportunities may include, but are not
limited to: extreme weather and rain, flooding, storm surge, extreme wind, discordant behavior or physical
conflict, and exposure to hazardous materials.
• For all projects:
− Identify opportunities for cooperative behavior, collaboration and coordination to improve
resilience and provide the socio-economic means for problem-solving.
− Identify technical opportunities that can be used to improve resilience and provide physical tools
for problem-solving.
− Document how the above analysis informed design and form decisions in the project’s OPR and
design analysis and the eventual design of the project.
− Perform a preliminary water budget analysis before the completion of schematic design that
explores how to reduce potable water loads in the building and/or on the site, and accomplish
related S+R goals.
− Assess and estimate the project’s potential non-potable water supply sources and water demand
volumes, including the following:
 Indoor water demand: assess proposed flow and flush fixture design case demand volumes.
 Outdoor water demand: assess proposed landscape irrigation design case demand volume.
 Process water demand: assess proposed kitchen, laundry, cooling tower, and other
equipment demand volumes, where applicable.
 Supply sources: assess all potential non-potable water supply source volumes, such as
onsite rainwater and graywater, municipally supplied nonpotable water, and HVAC equipment
condensate.
− Document how the above analysis informed building and site design decisions in the project’s
OPR and design analysis. Demonstrate how at least one onsite non-potable water supply source
was used to reduce the burden on municipal supply or wastewater treatment systems by
contributing to at least two of the nonpotable water demand components listed above.
Demonstrate how the analysis informed the design of the project, including the following, as
applicable:
 Plumbing systems
 Sewage conveyance and/or onsite treatment systems
 Rainwater quantity and quality management systems
 Landscaping, irrigation, and site elements
 Roofing systems and/or building form and geometry
 Other systems
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
14 04 November 2019
• For buildings projects, perform a preliminary “simple box” energy modeling analysis before the
completion of schematic design that explores how to reduce energy loads in the building and
accomplish related S+R goals by questioning default assumptions. Assess at least two potential
strategies associated with the following:
− Site conditions: assess shading, exterior lighting, hardscape, landscaping, and adjacent site
conditions
− Massing and orientation: assess how massing and orientation affect HVAC sizing, energy
consumption, lighting, and renewable energy opportunities
− Basic envelope attributes: assess insulation values, window-to-wall ratios, glazing characteristics,
shading, and window operability
− Lighting levels: assess interior surface reflectance values and lighting levels in occupied spaces
− Thermal comfort ranges: assess thermal comfort range options
− Plug and process load needs: assess reducing plug and process loads through programmatic
solutions (for example, equipment and purchasing policies, layout options)
− Programmatic and operational parameters: assess multifunctioning spaces, operating schedules,
space allotment per person, teleworking, reduction of building area, and anticipated operations
and maintenance (O&M)
− Document how the above analysis informed design and building form decisions in the project’s
OPR and design analysis and the eventual design of the project, including the following, as
applicable:
 Building and site program
 Building form and geometry
 Building envelope and façade treatments on different orientations
 Elimination and/or significant downsizing of building systems (for example, HVAC, lighting,
controls, exterior materials, interior finishes, and functional program elements)
 Other systems
− Describe how all other S+R principles and performance goals will be incorporated into the design.
− Engage the client in participating in and ideally leading a design charrette process with the
assistance of the project Design Team leadership. The Design Team should embrace a systems
thinking design approach. Follow the steps of design optimization, as applicable, in
ASHRAE 189.1 Section F1.1.1 (Charrette Process). Maintain all meeting minutes as attachments
for process documentation.
• Plan for construction oversight:
− Designate a team member, other than the contractor site superintendent, who will be responsible
for verifying the site is built per the construction specifications and drawings. This individual may
be the contractor’s S+R Coordinator, the CQC Manager (see Section 01 45 00, Quality Control,
for more information), or a separate individual qualified to ensure compliance as appropriate for
each project.
− Meet with the contractor prior to construction to review construction specifications, submittal
requirements, and drawings and to convey the project’s principles and performance goals.
− Describe the agreed upon method whereby changes can be made in the field during construction.
• Develop a strategy for preparing a site or project maintenance plan as appropriate:
− Include all team members in the development of the maintenance plan.
− Discuss available resources (for example, budget, staff, volunteers, equipment, materials) as part
of the maintenance plan. Determine short- and long-term maintenance principles and
performance goals.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 15
• Compile all Integrative Process (IP) documentation required above and submit in final electronic
format to the S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP, and Tyndall PMO as part of the design
closeout phase.
General Design Requirements
Accessible, Inclusive, Universal Design
Universal Design recognizes and encourages assets inclusive for all users regardless of age, size, ability,
or disability to use an asset; it addresses multiple aspects of a built space, including infrastructure,
signage, and technologies, and together seek to enhance the opportunity for all individuals to exist
independently and comfortably in a space. Due to variations in legislation and design practices for
accessibility, usability, and inclusivity, the project criterion herein does not stipulate extensive, specific
design requirements, dimensions, or number of each type of feature within the asset. This criterion does,
however, list strategies that Design Teams must consider for integration in order to constitute a
reasonable level of provision and design of features for the type, size, and number of users of any
particular asset.
All projects must refer to the following best practice guidance as applicable to each project type:
• International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 21542:2011, Building Construction: Accessibility
and Usability of the Built Environment
• BS 8300-1:2018, Design of an Accessible and Inclusive Built Environment, Part 1: External
Environment: Code of Practice
• BS 8300-2:2018, Design of an Accessible and Inclusive Built Environment, Part 2: Buildings: Code of
Practice
• Draft prEN 17210, Accessibility and Usability of the Built Environment, Functional Requirements
• Building for Everyone: A Universal Design Approach, Centre for Excellence in Universal Design, 2012
(http://universaldesign.ie/Built-Environment/Building-for-Everyone/)
The following features must be integrated to the maximum extent possible as appropriate to each project
type after projects have met required minimum project criteria from UFC 1-200-01, DoD Building Code,
and ADA Standards for Accessible Design:
• Accessibility features related to access:
− Step-free external access (that is, level, gentle slope, or ramp) from the site boundary to the main
entrance(s) or alternative accessible entrance of the asset.
− Handrails to external stepped and ramped access routes to the main entrance(s) or alternative
accessible entrance of the asset.
− Where car parking is provided for the asset and asset users include parents with young children,
designated parking spaces for motorists accompanied by a child in a stroller
• Accessibility features related to horizontal and vertical circulation:
− Accessible horizontal and vertical emergency evacuation routes (such as in the event of fire) and
facilities (such as evacuation chairs) or a strategy and plan for assisted evacuation.
− Include resting areas with seating at various heights, including seating with back rests and
without arm rests
− Provide accessible routes 43 inches in width, at minimum
− Install drinking fountains, assistance animal areas, and bike racks that are easily accessed from
all sides
− Include detectable warnings (such as truncated domes) at official pedestrian crossings that
intersect with vehicular paths
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
16 04 November 2019
− Design the site with open sight lines to and from entries
• Accessibility features related to the use of a facility:
− Power-operated entrance door(s) (such as via push pad or motion sensor).
− Door and drawer hardware that requires no grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist.
− Install 36-inch wide doors, at minimum, in all occupied spaces
− Provide circulation paths 20% wider than required, at minimum
− Increase clear floor space at appliances and fixtures to 30 by 52 inches, at minimum
− Increase the size of turning space to 72 inches in diameter, at minimum
• Accessibility features related to sanitary accommodation:
− Restroom(s) with an assistance alarm accessible by those who use wheelchairs, at least one of
which is a gender-neutral facility.
− Where asset users include parents with young children, baby changing facilities as well as baby
strap-in chairs accessible for all parents regardless of gender. Include family restrooms.
− Where showers, bathrooms, or changing rooms are provided for asset users, accessible versions
to accommodate persons who use wheelchairs, persons with limited mobility, and similar.
• Orientation and wayfinding:
− Well-planned layouts that clearly identify key elements such as entrances, reception areas,
sanitary facilities, and similar.
− Good lighting conditions with additional illumination at decision points such as access routes,
entrances, staircases, and elevators.
− Clear information and legible and easily understood signage, including availability in different
languages where appropriate to the asset location.
− Use of visual contrast and color to facilitate orientation and navigation, to provide warnings about
potential hazards, and to facilitate reading of information and signs.
− Provision of tactile information, for example, embossed signage, Braille signage, tactile walking
surface indicators, tactile maps, models and plans, changes in floor surface, changes in level,
tapping rails.
− Audible communication and sounds, for example, talking signs, announcement systems, audio
descriptive way-finding information, changes in walking surface.
• Assistive technologies:
− Hearing enhancement system(s) (such as induction loop) at service or reception counters and in
rooms and spaces used for meetings, lectures, classes, performances, spectator sport or films.
− Audible information systems.
− Visual alarm systems.
− Height adjustable desks, adjustable height counters (with fixtures, where applicable), and
accessible height sales and service counters.
− Voice or touch screen operated controls for devices and systems affecting occupancy of the
space and user comfort, including but not limited to, lighting, window shades, and thermostats.
Through thoughtful incorporation of accessible and Universal Design, projects can establish an inclusive
and enabling community where people of all abilities can effectively and easily access, use, and engage
with a space.
Compile all Universal Design documentation required above and submit in final electronic format to the
S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP, and Tyndall AFB PMO as part of the design closeout phase.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 17
Adaptability and Flexible Design of Buildings
Flexible design is a priority in military facilities, as mission priorities can shift and require different
functionality needs. Having adaptable major building elements increases project space flexibility, ease of
adaptive use, and recycling of building materials while considering differential durability and premature
obsolescence over building design life and individual component service lives.
All vertical projects must produce a project-specific Flexible Adaptation Study (FAS) in early design
phases, prior to the completion of concept development. The FAS must explore design strategies that
could be used to ensure longevity of the building past initial intended use and occupancy type.
Renovation projects must incorporate strategies as applicable to the existing site or building constraints.
Contents of the FAS will vary based on facility type. Some project types, particularly those without
administrative areas, may have fewer opportunities than an administrative building; such circumstances
must be included in the FAS to explain why a particular project may have had fewer opportunities to
address flexibility and adaptation.
The FAS must include exploration of the following:
• Feasibility: The likelihood to contain multiple or alternative building uses, area functions and different
tenancies over the expected life cycle, for example, related to the structural design of the building.
• Accessibility: Design aspects that facilitate the replacement of all major components within the life of
the building, for example, panels in floors and walls that can be removed without affecting the
structure, providing lifting beams and hoists. Accessibility also involves access to local services, such
as local power, data infrastructure, and similar.
• Versatility: The degree of adaptability of the internal environment to accommodate changes in
working practices.
• Adaptability: The potential of the building ventilation strategy to adapt to future building occupant
needs and climatic scenarios.
• Convertibility: The degree of adaptability of the internal physical space and external shell to
accommodate changes in use.
• Expandability: The potential for the building to be extended, horizontally, or vertically.
• Refurbishment Potential: The potential for major refurbishment, including replacing the façade.
Project design must then be informed via the study results and must implement the strategies below to
the maximum extent possible. New construction projects should include a minimum of six of the following
flexible design strategies; renovation projects should include a minimum of three:
• A flexible internal vertical loadbearing structure design with a regular column layout and few or no
loadbearing walls.
• Floor plan shapes, primary circulation routes, and floor-to-floor heights suitable for several potential
future uses.
• Use interstitial space. Design distribution zone utility systems and equipment (including HVAC,
plumbing, electrical, information technology, and life safety systems) to serve the occupied zones and
have the capacity to control multiple zones in both occupied and unoccupied spaces.
• Implement flexible power distribution (plug-and-play) systems for at least 50% of the project floor area
to enable lighting, data, voice, and other systems to be easily reconfigured and repurposed.
• Implement a flexible lighting control system with plug-and-play components such as wall controls,
sensors, and dimming ballasts for a minimum of 50% of the lighting load. The system must allow for
reconfiguring and repurposing of luminaires and controls without rewiring (such as having the
capability to group and assign luminaires into zones and change those zones as needed). Also, the
system must be flexible so that as a space changes functions, the lighting levels can change to suit
the needs of the space without rewiring or removing or adding luminaires.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
18 04 November 2019
• Identify horizontal expansion capacity equal to at least 30% of existing floor area without demolition of
occupied space (other than at the connection point).
• Design for future vertical expansion on at least 75% of the roof, ensuring that existing operations and
service systems can continue at or near capacity during the expansion.
• Design at least 50% of interior nonstructural walls, ceilings, and floors to be movable or demountable.
• Use movable or modular casework for at least 50% of casework and custom millwork. Base the
calculation on the combined value of casework and millwork, as determined by the cost estimator
or contractor.
• Include in at least one major component or systems purchase contract a clause specifying subcontractor,
vendor, or onsite take back system. To meet the criteria for a take-back or leasing
program, the arrangement must cover a “major system or component,” defined as any product or
group of items used in the majority (more than 50%) of the project spaces where that item is relevant.
Examples of qualifying systems include ceilings, carpeting, furniture, partitions, and casework. An
example that may not qualify is built-in casework, which is typically not installed in more than half of a
project’s spaces.
• Include integral labels. Reuse and recycling extend the use of materials, but during deconstruction it
can be difficult to identify reusable and recyclable products. Specifying products with integral labels
(radio frequency identification, engraving, embossing, or other permanent marking) containing
information on material origin, properties, and date of manufacture will allow easier identification and
reuse of these materials in the future. Refer to the Canadian Standards Association (CSA) Z782-06
Guideline for Design for Disassembly and Adaptability in Buildings for further information on integral
labeling.
• Leverage leasing arrangements. Systems such as furniture can be leased, and the vendor takes the
items back when the contract is up or the furniture is no longer needed. Leasing systems increase the
likelihood that items will be used more than once before they reach their end of life. They also remove
the burden of disposal from the project and can create an incentive to provide durable, reusable, and
recyclable products.
• Other design features deemed suitable by the Tyndall AFB PMO.
The Design Team must ensure, via coordination between their S+R Coordinator and that of the
construction team, that performance is tracked through construction to confirm that the reuse and
flexibility requirements specified in the project documents are implemented in their entirety.
The following documentation must be provided to the S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP, and
Tyndall AFB PMO in accordance with the above requirements:
• A copy of the study
• A narrative indicating which strategies will be implemented in the project, and justification of why
remaining strategies were not employed
• Drawings indicating locations of interior elements
• Tracking table showing total area of all interior elements, reused interior elements, percentage of
reused elements, and cost of each element, as applicable
• Tracking table for furniture and furnishings, listing all items and showing total cost, costs for reused,
salvaged, and refurbished items, and percentage of reused, salvaged, and refurbished items, as
applicable
• Site drawings, floor plans, and sections showing compliance with flexibility strategies, as applicable
• Cutsheets and product information showing compliance with flexibility strategies, as applicable
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 19
Daylighting and Views
Access to appropriate levels of natural daylight and views to the outside world in indoor environments can
be achieved through building design and space layout. Windows, atriums, and skylights are design
features that can be used to increase daylight in a space. The interior layout of the space also has an
impact on the daylight exposure received by users; for example, conference rooms can be added to the
center of the floor plate so that regularly occupied spaces have daylight exposure. Lighting strategies
using electric lighting can be used to achieve required light exposure.
All vertical projects must comply with daylighting requirements as stated in UFC 1-200-02, High
Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements. The UFC requirements include specific window-towall
ratios, and visible light reflectance of walls, partitions, and ceilings. Design teams must also consider
occupants’ views to the outside world when selecting interior partition types, doors, furniture, and other
potentially obstructing space components that may not affect daylighting levels in the same manner.
Design teams must calculate the amount of qualifying daylit areas in compliance with the UFC; teams
must also include calculations determining the percentage of regularly occupied space (for example,
offices, open office areas, conference rooms, workrooms, and classrooms) that has a direct view to the
outside. Building design and interior layouts should enable appropriate views for a minimum of 50% of
regularly occupied spaces, striving for 75% or more, especially for spaces that require long-term
(i.e. more than 2 hours of uninterrupted time) task work. Qualifying views must meet at least two of the
following criteria:
1) Multiple lines of sight to vision glazing in different directions at least 90 degrees apart.
− On the floor plan or furniture plans, draw two lines of sight to the vision glazing for each location
within the space.
− The space or location qualifies if the lines of sight are at least 90 degrees apart and if they are not
intercepted by any permanent interior obstructions. If necessary, draw sight lines on section or
elevation plans to confirm that permanent interior obstructions do not block the lines of sight.
− It may be easiest to determine the boundary of qualifying areas to nonqualifying areas.
2) Views that include at least two of the following: (1) flora, fauna, or sky; (2) movement; and (3) objects
at least 25 feet from the exterior of the glazing.
− In the plan, label the qualifying features located at the vision glazing.
− Two features must be indicated.
− Movement (feature 2) includes such activities as people walking, cars driving on the street, and
boats moving through the water. Movement of plants and trees from wind qualifies.
− Account for any changes in exterior views as floor elevation changes.
− In the plan, draw one line of sight to the vision glazing for each location in the space. The space
or location qualifies if the line of sight is not intercepted by any permanent interior obstructions. If
necessary, draw sight lines on section or elevation plans to confirm permanent interior
obstructions do not block the lines of sight.
3) Unobstructed views located within the distance of three times the head height of the vision glazing.
− Determine the head height of the vision glazing for each regularly occupied space. In the plan,
identify all regularly occupied floor area that is within three times the head height of the perimeter.
− The space or location qualifies if there are no permanent interior obstructions present in the area.
No permanent interior obstructions are allowed, regardless of their height.
Include in the views calculations any permanent interior obstructions. Movable furniture and partitions
may be excluded. Views into interior atria may be used to meet up to 30% of the required area. If the
entire regularly occupied space or area does not meet the requirements of the selected view type, include
only the regularly occupied floor area that complies.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
20 04 November 2019
Use a table format to list the regularly occupied spaces, total square footage of the space, and total
compliant square footage of the space. Calculate the percentage of compliant space individually and
provide an overall compliant space total.
Design teams should also consider providing access to daylight and views in non-regularly occupied
spaces such as entryways, corridors, and stairways. Since these spaces differ greatly in use from those
areas where tasks, learning, or other work-related efforts occur, teams should use the following guidance
for calculations:
• Daylighting: Achieve at least 100 lux for 25% of the non-regularly occupied floor area for 1- or 2-floor
buildings, 20% for 3- or 4-floor buildings, and 15% for buildings with 5 floors and greater.
• Views: Use the documentation methods described above for 25% of the non-regularly occupied floor
area for 1- or 2-floor buildings, 20% for 3- to 4-floor buildings, and 15% for buildings 5 floors and
above.
Compile all daylighting and views documentation listed above and submit in final electronic format to the
S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP, and Tyndall AFB PMO as part of the design closeout phase.
Include a summary narrative outlining the outcomes of these exercises.
Acoustic Comfort
To provide work and learning spaces that promote occupants’ well-being, productivity, and
communications through effective acoustic design, all vertical projects must incorporate appropriate
design measures to address acoustical concerns that are not already accommodated via UFC 1-301-01,
Structural Engineering. Research regarding acoustical impacts has shown that in adults, exposure to
traffic noise can lead to complications with the cardiovascular system, diabetes, hypertension, stroke,
depression and high blood pressure (Environmental Health Perspectives, 2008; Chang, et al., 2009;
Belojević et al., 1992; Wolfgang, 2014). For children, chronic aircraft noise exposure impairs reading
comprehension, mental arithmetic and proofreading. In both industrial and community studies, road traffic
noise exposure is related to raised catecholamine secretion levels in urine, indicating an increased stress
level in subjects exposed to such noise (Stansfeld and Matheson, 2003).
To help mitigate these and other controllable concerns, the design team must incorporate the following
strategies in combination with the UFC requirements to achieve a higher level of acoustical comfort in
Tyndall’s facilities.
Sound Mapping
As a clarified component to the UFC requirement to produce an Acoustical Implementation Plan (AIP),
perform strategic interior planning and site zoning starting in concept design to create an acoustical floor
plan that identifies internal and external noise sources that can negatively impact the acoustical
environment of interior spaces. In addressing internally generated noise, floor plans must be designed
with intent and use in mind. The plan must label spaces as either loud, mixed, or quiet as defined below:
• Loud zones: includes areas intended for appliances, mechanical equipment or amenities (for
example, kitchens, fitness rooms, social spaces, and recreational rooms).
• Quiet zones: includes areas intended for focused work, wellness, rest, study and/or privacy.
• Mixed zones: includes areas intended for learning, collaboration and/or presentation.
Mapping the sonic environments of facility spaces easily indicates the potential for noise from loud
spaces to impact more sensitive, quiet locations for focused work, learning or amenity.
The plan must additionally indicate mechanical equipment locations and corresponding HVAC noise
levels, sound transmission class (STC) or noise isolation class (NIC) ratings, and reverberation times as
described in the UFC.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 21
Provide the AIP and submit in final electronic format to the S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP,
and Tyndall AFB PMO as part of the design closeout phase.
S+R Education
To take advantage of the educational value of the sustainable and resilient features of a project, design
teams must incorporate actively instructional design components appropriate for each project type to
communicate the S+R value to Tyndall AFB occupants and visitors.
The design S+R Coordinator must work with the project team and Tyndall AFB PMO to determine the
desired format and content for presenting S+R educational material specific to each project to the
project’s end users and visitors. The Coordinator may use the SRMP as the organizing tool since it will
contain all major S+R measures specific to each project in a uniform format that will exist for each project;
additional measures that may be outlined within other Divisions of these Technical Guidelines or new
concepts brought forth by the project team should be considered for inclusion in the content to present a
holistic summary of each project’s S+R contributions.
At a minimum, the design S+R Coordinator must work with the design team to develop a case study living
document that includes how the project incorporated S+R into the project. At the start of construction, the
design Coordinator will transfer the educational material and case study in electronic format to the
contractor’s S+R Coordinator to complete with additional information relevant to the construction phase.
At project completion, the construction Coordinator must provide in electronic format finalized material to
the design S+R Coordinator for review, and Tyndall AFB PMO for approval and record. The Tyndall AFB
PMO may then update the content with operational data and use the material as appropriate to the
project type alongside other Tyndall educational and promotional initiatives.
Horizontal Projects
Horizontal projects vary in scale and scope. Educational features must be considered as appropriate to
each project type as well as in the context of Tyndall as a whole. Consider the following approaches;
alternatives may be discussed with the project team and Tyndall AFB PMO.
• Incorporate passive and self-guided features referencing the historical, environmental and cultural
context of the site, such as a visitor center, kiosks, historic artifacts, lighting, informational panels,
photographs, local artwork, spotting scopes and maps.
• Solicit local artists to design aspects of public areas or to exhibit work on site.
• Provide programming that supports the cultural or aeronautical history of the site (for example,
historic planes), or opportunities for citizen science and environmental stewardship.
• Provide facilities or host stewardship and educational organizations for free or at low cost. Storage
and bathroom facilities are critical for supporting public programs.
• Include temporary vehicle access and parking for program providers to enable deliveries and event
staging.
Some projects may involve an extensive and visible archaeological excavation, and/or the dismantling,
refurbishment or restoration of an historic feature. There is often a high level of public interest in these
issues and value may be generated by the project through public access to the site or by publicity
materials such as providing site visits and information boards. It may also be generated through involving
amateur and local interest groups in surveys, publications, or in producing other media such as leaflets or
web-based material.
The project may also be able to contribute to local education objectives through providing site visits, talks
(to schools and local groups) and materials for curriculum activities. Communication with the public may
also be achieved by liaison with the media and museum exhibitions.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
22 04 November 2019
The possibility of allowing members of the public, via their local historical or archaeological societies,
access to view the site or to contribute to desk-based or field-based activities should be considered. This
will help to maintain relations with the local community provide positive public relations and held meet
historic environment objective to communicate new knowledge about the past. The access can be at a
specified time outside operating hours, although a member of the site management team will have to be
present. Alternatively, it can be in an area partitioned off from the rest of the site, or visits can be arranged
in guided groups.
Vertical Projects
Educational opportunities for buildings should elaborate on construction methods, building material
attributes, fixture and system features, operational efficiency, and user environment and experience.
Educational features must be considered as appropriate to each project type as well as in the context of
Tyndall as a whole. Consider the following approaches; alternatives may be discussed with the project
team and Tyndall AFB PMO.
• A comprehensive signage program built into the building's spaces to educate the occupants and
visitors of the benefits of green buildings. This program may include windows to view energy-saving
mechanical equipment or signs to call attention to water-conserving landscape features.
• The development of a manual or guideline to inform the design of other buildings based on the
successes of this project.
• An educational outreach program or guided tour could be developed to focus on sustainable and
resilient living, using the project as an example.
• Educational web site (URL to be provided at submission) that shares information about the design,
construction, and operation of the facility. Performance metrics are encouraged to be included.
• An educational video describing the project’s environmental features; the video may be shown on
digital displays in the building or throughout the Installation, or on web-based platforms and social
media as appropriate.
• Non-residential projects: At least one annual “open day” for select facilities at Tyndall to educate the
public about the different project types and applicable achievements. This “open day” must be
publicized to the Tyndall community at large, and should be considered for inclusion of the general
public if it can be executed in a manner that does not impact security or other operational concerns.
Circulation Performance Requirements
Stair climbing is classified as moderate-to-vigorous physical activity and can enhance the health and
fitness of building occupants. By creating aesthetically designed staircases and hallways, and
encouraging stair use when available, Tyndall facilities can encourage occupants to accrue bouts of
health-enhancing physical activity throughout the day as required in UFC 1-200-02, High Performance
and Sustainable Building Requirements. To promote design that enables occupants’ daily physical activity
and movement through the design of the circulation in a facility, the design team must consider strategies
addressing both accessibility and aesthetics.
For All Spaces
Implement point-of-decision signage that encourages stair use at each of the following locations within
the project boundary (minimum of one sign per location):
• Elevator banks or other modes of motorized vertical circulation (such as escalators)
• Base of stairs/stairwells and re-entry points at each floor
• Junctions in corridors that lead to either a stairwell open to regular building occupants or an elevator
bank (or other modes of motorized vertical circulation)
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 23
Stairways
Primary staircases in multilevel buildings must be located physically and/or visibly before any motorized
vertical circulation (that is, an elevator), as measured from the main point of entry to the project or
building. The primary stair must be visible from the main corridor by either:
• Providing transparent glazing of at least 10 square feet at all stair doors or at a side light
• Providing magnetic door holds on all doors leading to the stairs
• Providing unenclosed stairs
At least one stairway or other active path between floors (such as a ramp) must accessible to all regular
building occupants, service all floors of the building, and be aesthetically designed through the inclusion
of at least two of the following per floor:
• Artwork
• Light levels of at least 215 lux (20 footcandles [fc]) when in use
• Views of an interior atrium, courtyard or daylight via windows or skylights
• Natural design elements (for example, plants, water features, images of nature)
Provide a summary of the circulation measures implemented and submit in final electronic format to the
S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP, and Tyndall AFB PMO as part of the design closeout phase.
Storm Shelter Safe Room Special Construction Performance Requirements
In vertical projects, when required by the project scope to designate rooms as shelters or “safe rooms” in
which to congregate during extreme weather events such as tornados or other high wind events, such
rooms must be designed in accordance with the latest editions of the following reference documents:
• International Code Council: Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters (ICC 500)
Exception: Wind speeds for the design of structures must be at a minimum the speeds as listed within
these Technical Guidelines and as required by the UFC
• Federal Emergency Management Agency: Safe Rooms for Tornadoes and Hurricanes: Guidance for
Community and Residential Safe Rooms (P-361)
Design teams must coordinate to consider increased reliability of lighting, plumbing, and mechanical
systems within the safe room(s).
These rooms must be identified with signage signifying the specific purpose of the space to building
occupants and visitors in the event of need. The space may serve as an otherwise regularly used space
during normal operation but must not be restricted in terms of usable shelter area as appropriate for the
anticipated number of occupants of the building.
Requirements for Construction Activities
Energy Reduction
Because construction energy use is closely linked to emissions, contractors are required to review energy
efficiency, energy reduction, renewable energy use, and reduced emissions associated with the
construction phase of all horizontal projects impacting over 5,000 square feet, and all qualifying vertical
projects as delineated in Table 1-1 of UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building
Requirements.
Construction teams should begin with a thorough review of the means and methods of constructing the
project, including a review of how energy is to be consumed during construction and opportunities for
energy reduction. The list of energy reduction strategies should be used as a guide to identify and
analyze options.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
24 04 November 2019
Conducting detailed calculations of construction energy consumption can be burdensome if not
impossible; industry standards on construction energy use do not currently exist. Therefore, the number
of energy-conserving and emission-reducing strategies deployed on the project will act as the metric for
compliance. The activities (listed below) may be more or less difficult to achieve depending on the project
type and context, which is why a wide range of options are available.
Strategies that should be considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
• Tier IV construction equipment or Tier III with Best Available Technology for at least 75% of non-road
equipment fleet greater than 50 horsepower
• Alternative fuels, such as biodiesel, in heavy equipment for at least 5% of total fuel consumption
• Hybrid or fully electric project vehicles for at least 50% of fleet
• Electrified equipment for at least 20% of equipment (vs. gas or diesel engines)
• Employee commuting programs with incentives (such as shuttles to transit, ride-share programs,
biking facilities)
• Reduce purchased energy for workstations (construction trailer/office energy) by 30% for two of the
following: (1) lighting, (2) HVAC, (3) plug loads
• Purchase green power (Renewable Energy Certificates) for 30% of workstation energy consumption
• Offset electrical consumption by generating 5% renewable energy on site (for example, solar panels
on a trailer complex, solar-powered temporary light plant, solar-powered cameras and variable
message sign boards)
• Reduce overall fuel consumption by 10% through improved planning and logistics; specific strategies
may include:
− Reducing the number of deliveries
− Reducing idle times
− Reducing onsite reuse of soils or other materials to decrease truck traffic to and from site (ties
into Reduced Excavated Material taken offsite)
− Reducing onsite trucking and implementing proper logistics planning, such as staging material in
close proximity to installation location
− Scheduling acceleration without additional resource consumption
− Implementing waterborne/rail transportation of materials versus trucking (third-party distribution or
logistics)
− Using onsite plants (for concrete or asphalt) in lieu of trucking material to the site
− Prefabricating design elements
Additional strategies may be proposed by the construction team to the project’s construction S+R
Coordinator and Tyndall AFB PMO for consideration. Construction teams should strive to implement at
least three of the options listed above or otherwise proposed and approved.
Water Reduction
As part of this requirement, the construction team must similarly address the potential to reduce water
consumption during construction. Overuse of water not only depletes waterbodies and lowers
groundwater levels, but the treatment of water consumes large amounts of energy. In many cases, it is
not necessary to use potable water for the intended task. Greywater, recycled water, and stormwater are
alternatives to potable water use, especially in construction.
Compliance will be distinguished by the water conservation strategies implemented during construction.
Conducting detailed calculations of construction potable water consumption can be burdensome if not
impossible; industry standards on construction water use do not exist. Therefore, the number of water
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 25
conserving strategies deployed on the project will act as the metric for achievement. Strategies that meet
the credit requirements are listed below. Strategies may be more or less difficult to achieve depending on
the project type and context, which is why a wide range of options are available.
In fulfilling this requirement, project teams should begin with a thorough review of the means and
methods of constructing the project, including a review of how water is to be consumed during
construction. The list of water reduction strategies should be used as a guide to identify and analyze
options. The use of surface water and marginal groundwater in lieu of potable water should not be
considered if use of these waters will have a negative impact on water availability or quality.
Strategies that should be considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
• Installing high-efficiency fixtures in construction trailers or offices (demonstrate a 40% reduction
in usage)
• Monitoring and managing the team’s ability to detect leaks and respond to inefficiencies in the system
• Reducing embodied water of materials by reducing waste material (calculate a 10% reduction in
material quantities entering the site as new material)
• Using alternatives to dust suppression, such as dry agents (show 50% reduction in water usage
because of alternative option)
• Implementing alternatives for curing concrete (show 50% reduction in water usage because of
alternative option)
• Using alternatives for truck tire wash stations (show 50% reduction in water usage because of
alternative option)
• Reducing embodied water through the selection of alternative permanent and temporary materials
(demonstrate how product selection contributes to reduced potable water consumption by more
than 25%)
• Harvesting stormwater (show 40% savings by using harvested stormwater)
• Reusing greywater or wastewater effluent (show 40% reuse)
• Dewatering reuse (show 40% reuse/recycling)
The construction team may propose additional strategies to the project’s construction S+R Coordinator
and Tyndall AFB PMO for consideration. Construction teams should strive to implement at least three of
the options listed above or otherwise proposed and approved.
The construction energy and water use reduction requirement is applicable to all projects that consume
energy and/or water during construction. In rare cases, where the amount of energy or water used during
construction is insignificant in comparison to the scale of the project, project teams may be exempt from
this requirement if deemed applicable by the Tyndall AFB PMO. That individual must exercise his/her
discretion in determining what constitutes an insignificant quantity of construction energy and/or use in
the context of the project and justify in writing for record.
Provide documentation that the project has implemented, or has policies to implement, energy and/or
water conservation strategies during construction to the construction S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the
SRMP, and Tyndall AFB PMO as part of the design closeout phase.
01 18 00 Project Utility Sources
All communication with external utility providers is routed through the Tyndall AFB PMO. The PMO’s
Utilities Privatization Contracting Officer’s Representative will provide current contact information for the
utility providers below.
Electrical Power
• Power generation is provided by Gulf Power.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
26 04 November 2019
• Power distribution system is privatized under Gulf Coast Electrical Cooperative (GCEC)
− GCEC Supervisor of Military Affairs, 540 Mississippi Ave. Bldg. 36270, Tyndall AFB, FL 32403,
(850) 819-0299
− GCEC Vice President of Engineering, 9434 Hwy. 77 P.O. Box 8370, Southport, FL 32409,
(850) 913-3734
GCEC design criteria and pertinent schematics conform to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural
Development (RUS), which are located at https://www.rd.usda.gov/publications/regulationsguidelines/
bulletins/electric
Domestic Water
• Water treatment and supply are provided by Bay County, Florida.
• Water distribution (fire protection and domestic) is privatized under GCEC.
Sanitary Sewer
• Wastewater treatment is provided by Bay County, Florida.
• Wastewater collection and transmission is provided by the U.S. Air Force (USAF) to the Bay County
owned and operated Military Point Advanced Wastewater Treatment plant.
Natural Gas
• Natural gas supply and distribution provided is privatized under TECO/Peoples Gas.
− Division Manager, 3706 West 23rd Street, Panama City, Florida 32405; (850) 914-6129
TECO owns, operates, constructs, and inspects all natural gas facilities up to the outlet side of the
meter. TECO’s manuals are based on the following state and federal codes:
− Federal: DOT PHMSA 49 CFR 192
− State: Florida PSC Chapter 25-12
Communications
• 325th Communications Squadron
− Command: (850) 283-2021
− Help Desk: (850) 283-4896
• AT&T Wireless
− Tyndall Contact: (850) 640-9308
01 33 16 Design After Award (Design-Build Projects)
For the Rebuild Tyndall program, the sustainability requirements of UFGS Section 01 33 16.00 10 are to
be coordinated with Section 01 33 29, Sustainability and Resiliency Reporting. Both sustainability and
resilience are to be incorporated into the design analyses, specifications and drawings in each iteration of
design review submittals. Design analyses must include clearly identified “resilient design” features
required by the program in addition to the “sustainable design” features specified. Each discipline
subsection of the design analyses should also refer to the sustainable and resilient features that are
incorporated into their work. In the design analysis, under the heading of Operations and Maintenance
Provisions, projects must identify sustainable and resilient design features which enhance the functioning
and maintainability of the completed project, including the “5 Rs of Resilience” (see the Tyndall AFB
Performance Standards document). Specifications with product information must include relevant
sustainable procurement information and resiliency information, such as a Miami-Dade NOA.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 27
01 33 29 Sustainability and Resiliency Reporting
For the Rebuild Tyndall program, progress on resiliency goals will be reported using the patterns already
established for sustainability reporting for Federal programs. For example, the standard requirement for a
Sustainability eNotebook as defined in UFGS Section 01 33 29 must now include resiliency reporting. As
a second example, the Contracting Officer may deduct from the monthly progress payment accordingly if
Sustainability and Resiliency eNotebook information is not current, until information is updated and on
track in accordance with the project goals.
Project teams must provide documentation for Guiding Principles certification for all qualifying buildings
projects as independently required by UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building
Requirements, and A-GRAM 17-01 February 2017. The Guiding Principles certification effort is an
existing criterion that will be upheld for all building projects; the contents of these Technical Guidelines
align with requirements and exceed the Guiding Principles in aspirational planning aspects, and in no way
conflict with the requirements therein or prevent projects from being able to meet the UFC requirements.
The certification process and documentation requirements are outlined in the abovementioned criteria,
with additional instructions provided by the designated certification entity. Horizontal projects do not
require third-party certification, but must provide relevant sustainability and resiliency documentation as
required by the Sustainability and Resiliency Management Plan for each project as reviewed and
accepted by the government.
Sustainability and Resiliency Management Plan
In conjunction with the project team, the design team’s S+R Coordinator must develop an initial SRMP at
the time of project design award. The SRMP must detail how sustainability and resiliency will be
integrated into each project’s design, track compliance throughout the design process, and include
placeholders for required components related to the construction phase. An SRMP enables a project
team to set goals, objectives, and policies; instigate plans and programs; review performance against a
plan; and take corrective actions across the full dimensions of sustainability. The ISO 14004 standard for
social and environmental management plans provides guidance on developing a Sustainability
Management Plan.
SRMPs may stand-alone or be incorporated into larger project management plans. The project team
should coordinate documentation with Technical Guidelines Section 01 45 00, Quality Control, and UFGS
Section 01 33 29. The SRMP must manage the scope, scale, and complexity of the project’s S+R
requirements and goals and describe how each will be met. The assessment is based on the
organizational policies, authorities, mechanisms, education, and business processes put in place along
with a determination of sufficiency. For smaller projects, sustainability management policies may be
sufficient. In the design phase, the SRMP must be summarized in the design analysis for the project, and
provided in its entirety as an appendix to that document. In the construction phase, the SRMP will be a
component of the Sustainability and Resiliency eNotebook.
The SRMP must include the following minimum components:
• An internally hyperlinked Table of Contents
• An Executive Summary outlining the main project information and applicable Plan components.
Organizational charts and documentation showing the personnel responsible for project S+R issues,
their position in the project organization, and their authority to make project decisions and
affect change.
• An index of all trackable project features related to sustainability and resiliency and all aspects that
require tracking, reporting, or other documentation. Consider using a table similar to the following
example, summarizing basic project information and all applicable components and responsible
party(ies).
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
28 04 November 2019
SRMP Content Tracker
Project Name:
Project Category (Horizontal, Vertical, Other):
Project Type (e.g. roadway, landscaping,
coastal, restorative, utilities, infrastructure
(type), repair, replacement, new building
construction, major building renovation, etc.):
Project Size (SF):
Project location on Base (Zone, approx area):
Design Team Project Manager:
Construction Team Project Manager:
Tyndall PMO Representative:
SRMP Components
Refer to the Pre-Final Tyndall AFB IFS
(USAF, 2018) for applicability
based on project type
Required for
Design
Required for
Construction
Primary
Responsible
Party
Notes
Integrative Process Documentation X
Energy Conservation Report (ECR) X
Universal Design Documentation X
Flexible Adaptation Study (FAS) X
Acoustical Implementation Plan (AIP) X
S+R Educational Material and Case Study X X
Case Study will be living
document; Tyndall to provide
final updates with operational
information.
Circulation Documentation X
Material and Product Plan (MPP) X X
Project Safety Plan (PSP) X X
Construction Energy and Water Use
Documentation
X
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
including Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plan (ESCP)
X X
Light Pollution Reduction calculations,
documentation X
Construction Impact Mitigation Plan (CIMP) X
Construction and Demolition Waste
Management Plan (CDWMP)
X
Indoor Air Quality Plan (IAQP)
Commissioning Plan (CxP) X
• Assessment of the project’s environmental, economic, and social impacts. This may include the
potential for existing, non-sustainable conditions to further deteriorate environmental, economic, or
social conditions if left unaddressed.
• Prioritized list of project goals, objectives, and performance targets that consider project importance
and the consequences of change. Goals should be aligned to objectives and targets that meet
program needs and issues.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 29
• Documentation of how the S+R requirements will be communicated to the design team and verified
with the Tyndall AFB PMO. Coordinate with Section 01 33 16, Design After Award (Design-Build
Projects, and Section 01 45 00, Quality Control.
• Identification of potential areas where changes in key design variables may impact future project
performance related to S+R. Include evidence that the SRMP accounts for these potential changes
and is adaptable. Document original intended measure, discussion of variation, and detail any
changes to the planned design. Include meeting minutes, email correspondences, and similar as
appropriate.
• Documentation that regular monitoring and reporting of progress against the SRMP’s goals and
objectives is occurring throughout the design phase via the design analysis.
• Plans for how the S+R requirements will be communicated and transitioned from the design phase to
the construction phase through methods such as construction plans, daily job briefings, subcontractor
orientations, or onsite field training sessions; plans for what aspects of the SRMP will carry into
operations, such as the PSP or the S+R Educational Material and Case Study.
To create the SRMP, the S+R Coordinator must develop a list of all the environmental, economic, and
social aspects of the project that relate to sustainability and resiliency. Once established, the project team
will prioritize the list of aspects based on their importance of meeting project requirements. There may be
some variations depending on the project’s size, type, and complexity. The SRMP must have clear
processes and controls in place to achieve the requirements (that is, the SRMP is not solely aspirational
in nature). Implementation of the SRMP must be revisited regularly throughout the design phase, updated
as needed, and submitted as part of each major milestone submittal to the Tyndall AFB PMO. The SRMP
should recognize that changes in socioeconomic and environmental conditions—including those outside
the Installation—have the potential to significantly impact projects. SRMPs and their subsequent
performance goals must take these changing conditions into account.
At the start of the construction phase, the SRMP should be transferred to the contractor’s S+R
Coordinator where it must then be updated with content detailing how the construction team intends to
assimilate the SRMP components and execute all requirements. The contractor’s S+R Coordinator must
provide the updated version to the design team’s S+R Coordinator for review and approval prior to final
submission to the Tyndall AFB PMO who will then confirm the Plan satisfactory complete. The
contractor’s Coordinator must provide regular updates to the SRMP throughout the construction phase,
as well as complete a final version including end results of all initiatives to the Tyndall AFB PMO
for record.
01 35 00 Health and Safety Special Procedures
The purpose of this section is to improve health and safety of users of the completed project through
forward-thinking design. Through implementation of the measures within these Technical Guidelines,
projects at Tyndall AFB will exceed minimum regulatory requirements in their efforts to improve health
and safety on the project site, surrounding areas, and broader communities. Project teams cannot always
eliminate risks to health and safety but can demonstrate that both the benefits and exposure to risks
associated with the project are not disproportionately burdened for one group of users over another.
Having and promoting a common focus on health and safety throughout the construction industry has
benefits that extend beyond the individual project.
Because projects teams who are governed by the Pre-Final Tyndall AFB IFS (USAF, 2018) and the
companion guidance (including these Technical Guidelines) may encounter enhanced design, product, or
construction specifications that may not be present in standard criteria, project teams must conduct a lifecycle
safety and health analysis and develop a PSP to address risks associated with using new materials,
technologies, and/or methodologies. The purpose of the PSP is to support high-performance, costeffective
employee safety and health outcomes across the building life-cycle through early attention to
safety and health hazards. The components of these requirements address safety procedures for onsite
workers, personnel training and development, and site and information security. These themes not only
protect the individuals working on the site, they help to maintain safe and secure operations of the asset
and provide a foundation for proper O&M of the facility. The project design team must initiate the PSP as
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
30 04 November 2019
indicated below and must transfer the document to the construction team to inform construction phase
implementation of these project features.
Design Team – Vertical Projects
Beginning in pre-design and continuing throughout the design phases, the PSP must identify and use
opportunities to achieve safety and health synergies across disciplines and across two key building lifecycle
stages described below. The design team should use the analyses to inform the OPR, design
analysis, design documents, and construction documents.
• Perform safety design reviews before the completion of schematic design to explore how the
completed building will be operated and maintained over its expected lifetime. Use a life-cycle safety
approach to explore how to reduce hazards and improve efficiency and well-being for building O&M
personnel. Assess each of the following systems where applicable:
− Roof Systems. Assess how personnel will access the roof for operations, inspection, and
maintenance; the distance of equipment and feature locations (including some types of cool
roofs, and other installations) to roof edge; equipment installation and replacement access
(including point loading); and the need for installation of fall protection measures.
− Equipment Rooms and Systems. Assess how personnel will access equipment and controls
needing servicing; any work at height or in confined spaces; need for sufficient clearances to
electrical or other equipment; equipment installation and replacement access; chemical storage
needs; and fall protection, eye wash, or other safety feature needs.
− Building Exterior Enclosure and Daylighting Systems. Assess how personnel will clean
exterior (e.g. cladding including windows and exterior shading devices) and interior atria features.
− Storage and Collection of Recyclables. Assess the need for O&M workers to manually handle
recyclables. Assess measures needed for handling of hazardous waste streams that could
contain batteries, sharp edges, mercury-containing lamps, or similar items.
− Special Features. If applicable, assess rainwater management cisterns, energy recovery wheels,
or other specialty systems for confined space hazards. Assess access, confined space, and fall
exposures for underfloor air distribution systems.
• Document in narrative form how the reviews led to incorporating at least one protective measure for
each system into design and building feature decisions in the project’s OPR and design analysis,
including the following, as applicable:
− Building roof designs (for example, use of parapets, guard rails, setbacks, fall protection)
− Equipment room and recyclable storage area design and layout
− Exterior enclosure, daylighting, and special feature designs
− Safe O&M plans for submittal to Owner, including recommendations where applicable for use of
personal protective equipment (PPE) such as foot, head, eye and face, ear, respiratory, and fall
protection
• Have a construction safety specialist perform safety constructability reviews before the completion of
schematic design to explore and plan how safety and efficiency can be optimized during construction.
If feasible, engage a general contractor and key trade contractors and suppliers improves planning
and allows consideration of options such as prefabrication and modularization that can improve
construction employee safety, construction efficiency, and downstream maintenance efficiency and
safety. Assess the following topic areas where applicable:
− Site Conditions. Assess site hazards such as presence of overhead power lines or brownfieldrelated
soil exposures relevant to foundation work.
− Building Reuse. Assess potential hazards arising out of reuse, ranging from structural safety and
deconstruction safety to the presence of hazardous materials such as lead, asbestos, or mold.
− Construction Activity Pollution Prevention. Assess how the Pollution Prevention Plan can be
used to further reduce exposures to construction employees. For example, use local exhaust
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 31
ventilated tools and/or wet method controls on all outdoor dust-generating tools and equipment to
reduce exposures from silica, welding, and other construction contaminants at the source.
− Construction Indoor Air Quality Management. Assess how the Indoor Air Quality Management
Plan can be used to further reduce exposures to construction employees. For example, use local
exhaust ventilated tools and/or wet method controls on all indoor dust-generating tools and
equipment to reduce exposures from silica, welding, and other construction contaminants at
the source.
− Waste Recycling Management. Assess construction worker handling of construction wastes,
and incorporate measures (for example, the use of motorized equipment) to minimize potential for
manual handling injuries into waste management plans.
− Materials and Resources. Assess the utility of low-emitting materials, material ingredient
reporting, chemical of concern avoidance, and source reduction approaches to further reduce
construction worker exposures.
− Working at Heights. Assess and minimize the need for working at heights. Where appropriate,
use permanent fall prevention features developed during O&M safety design review. Plan for
general contractors to employ 100% fall protection during the construction phase.
− Special Features. If applicable, assess construction safety and sequence issues (for example,
fall hazards, and confined space hazards) related to cool roofs, installation of solar panels,
rainwater management cisterns, energy recovery wheels, underfloor air distribution systems, or
other special features.
• Document how the above reviews led to incorporating at least one protective measure strategy for
each of the applicable topic areas above into the project’s design and construction documents, such
as those listed below:
− Construction plan describing key construction stages
− Building and temporary structure designs
− Construction PSP describing safety expectations, roles, procedures, and goals, including
recommendations, where applicable, for use of PPE, such as foot, head, eye, ear, respiratory,
and fall protection
− Construction Activity Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP, ESCP)
− Construction Indoor Air Quality Management Plan (describe additional worker safety measures)
− Construction and Demolition Waste Management Plan (describe additional worker safety
measures)
Compile the above documentation into an organized format and provide to the Tyndall AFB PMO for
record. Refer to Attachment 3, Project Safety Plan (PSP) Life Cycle Safety and Health Worksheet, for an
example documentation template. Provide an electronic, editable copy to the construction team for
perpetuation of development and implementation.
Construction Team – All Projects
The construction team must comply with the requirements of UFGS 01 35 26. The Activity Hazard
Analysis must include consideration for coordination with other contractors who are working in nearby or
overlapping areas.
The PSP is broader than the Contractor’s Activity Hazard Analysis to protect construction workers. The
PSP includes implementation of design features to improve the safety for future users and maintainers of
the completed project, such as increased arc flash safety setbacks from electrical equipment. The PSP
has input from future building users, the designers, the constructors, and is archived for use by the
building users and maintainers.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
32 04 November 2019
Project Safety Plan
The contractor’s Safety Officer and management team members must develop a PSP representative of
the entire duration of the project and includes the following minimum components:
• Documentation that the Owner and contractor have a site-specific safety plan and a PSP. This plan
may include, but is not limited to, contractor background checks on personnel working on the project,
and 24-hour security monitoring on the project (physical/electronic). The security plan should be
appropriate to the size and scope of the project.
• For small projects (less than $5 million in cost), Owners and contractors may substitute general site
security policies for the site-specific plan.
• A short narrative that describes the goals of the PSP and how the PSP will be implemented and used
to manage safety on the project. Include documentation showing the Owner and contractors
developed a proactive investigative process that focuses on root-cause and corrective actions rather
than disciplinary actions and financial penalties.
• A list or table of all major construction operations occurring within the work zone, including dates and
locations of each operation.
• Documentation of safety and/or security competency training programs, either online or in person, for
field personnel, including type of training provided and how they specifically target health and safety.
Training may include task-specific safety training or general awareness training.
• Documentation of minimum training requirements for health and safety programs, such as
occupational safety and health, first aid, cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, emergency response, and
active shooter training.
• A description of the sequence for each operation.
• A list or table that identifies all potential hazards associated with each step in the sequence of each
operation.
• A list of preventive actions for each potential hazard.
• A list of any individuals or parties responsible for implementing preventive actions.
• Include documentation showing contractors developed program requirements to ensure
subcontractors maintain a high level of safety per the contract.
• Include documentation showing Owners and contractors have an incident review process that
involves all levels of management to validate corrective measures to minimize future injuries and
incidents on the job site.
• Documentation that contractors develop “lessons learned” reports that allow other contractors and
projects the opportunity to review the fact-finding of an incident and implement processes and
procedures to minimize similar incidents on the job site.
• A description of miscellaneous or additional hazards that may be present within or adjacent to the
work zone and an appropriate means of abatement or prevention.
Record any changes to the PSP throughout the construction process with an explanatory narrative
describing circumstances, if necessary. Compile the above documentation into an organized format and
provide to the design S+R Coordinator and Tyndall AFB PMO for record at the completion of construction.
01 35 46 Indoor Air Quality Procedures
Construction Indoor Air Quality Management Plan
All vertical projects require a Construction Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Management Plan as well as
consideration of preoccupancy air quality assurance in accordance with the requirements set forth in UFC
1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements. Project designers must include
these requirements in the project specifications. The project contractor must then develop and implement
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 33
the IAQ Management Plan for the construction and preoccupancy phases of the project based on the
criteria provided. The IAQ Management Plan is typically prepared by the general contractor or
construction manager. It includes IAQ management practices implemented during construction and
preoccupancy phases and describes how each requirement in the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning
National Contractors Association (SMACNA) guidelines and other requirements listed below will be
addressed and managed on the job site.
For all vertical project types, the IAQ Management Plan must address all of the following:
• During construction, meet or exceed all applicable recommended control measures of the SMACNA
IAQ Guidelines for Occupied Buildings Under Construction, 2nd edition, 2007, ANSI/SMACNA 008–
2008, Chapter 3. The following SMACNA guidelines must be included:
− HVAC Protection. Keep contaminants out of the HVAC system. Do not run permanently installed
equipment if possible, or maintain proper filtration if it is used.
 If conditioning is required during construction, use supplementary HVAC units instead of
permanently installed equipment if possible.
 Do not operate permanently installed air-handling equipment during construction unless
filtration media with a minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) of 8, as determined by
ASHRAE 52.2–2017, with errata (or media with ISOcoarse 90% or higher, as defined by ISO
16890-2016, Particulate Air Filters for General Ventilation, Determination of the Filtration
Performance), are installed at each return air grille and return or transfer duct inlet opening
such that there is no bypass around the filtration media. Immediately before occupancy,
replace all filtration media with the final design filtration media, installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Seal all ductwork, registers, diffusers, and returns with plastic when stored on site or not in
service. Seal unfinished runs of ductwork at the end of each day.
 Do not store materials in mechanical rooms, which will reduce potential debris and
contamination to mechanical systems.
− Source Control. Keep sources of contaminants out of the building and have a plan to eliminate
any that are introduced.
 Use low-toxicity and low-volatile organic compound (VOC) materials to the greatest extent
possible.
 Develop protocols for the use of any high-toxicity materials. Isolate areas where high-toxicity
materials are being installed and use temporary ventilation for that area.
 Prevent exhaust fumes (from idling vehicles, equipment, and fossil-fueled tools) from entering
the building.
 Enforce the no-smoking job site policy.
 Protect stored materials from moisture because absorbent materials exposed to moisture
during construction can mold and degenerate long after installation. Store materials in dry
conditions indoors, under cover, and off the ground or floor.
 If materials are improperly exposed to moisture, replace the material and consider testing air
quality before occupancy to make sure no mold contamination has occurred.
− Pathway Interruption. Prevent circulation of contaminated air when cutting concrete or wood,
sanding drywall, installing VOC-emitting materials, or performing other activities that affect IAQ in
other work spaces.
 Isolate areas of work to prevent contamination of other spaces, whether they are finished or
not. Seal doorways, windows, or tent off areas as needed using temporary barriers, such as
plastic separations. Provide walk-off mats at entryways to reduce introduced dirt and
pollutants.
 Depressurize the work area to allow a differential between construction areas and clean
areas. Exhaust to the outdoors using 100% outdoor air, if possible.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
34 04 November 2019
 Use dust guards and collectors on saws and other tools.
− Housekeeping. Maintaining a clean job site results in fewer IAQ contaminants to manage.
 Maintain good job site housekeeping on a daily basis. Use vacuum cleaners with highefficiency
particulate filters and use sweeping compounds or wetting agents for dust control
when sweeping.
 Keep materials organized to improve job site safety as well as indoor air quality.
− Scheduling. Sequence construction activities to reduce air quality problems in new construction
projects. For major renovations, coordinate construction activities to minimize or eliminate
disruption of operations in occupied areas.
 Keep trades that affect IAQ physically isolated on site and separated from each other by the
construction schedule. For example, schedule drywall finishing and carpet installation for
different days or different sections of the building. Consider after-hours or weekend work if
practical.
 Install absorptive-finish materials after wet-applied materials have fully cured whenever
possible. For example, install carpet and ceiling tile after paints and stains are completely dry.
 Remove all temporary filtration media and replace them with new filters before occupancy.
• Prohibit the use of smoking inside the building and within 50 feet of the building entrance during
construction, including tobacco smoke, as well as smoke produced from the combustion of cannabis
and controlled substances and the emissions produced by electronic smoking devices.
For healthcare and child-related facilities, the IAQ Management Plan must also address the following:
• Moisture. Develop and implement a moisture control plan to protect stored and installed absorptive
materials from moisture damage. Immediately remove and properly dispose of any materials
susceptible to microbial growth and replace with new, undamaged materials. Include strategies for
protecting the building from moisture intrusion and preventing occupant exposure to mold spores.
• Particulates. Do not operate permanently installed air-handling equipment during construction unless
filtration media with a MERV of 8, as determined by ASHRAE 52.2–2017, with errata (or media with
ISOcoarse 90% or higher, as defined by ISO 16890-2016, Particulate Air Filters for General Ventilation,
Determination of the Filtration Performance), are installed at each return air grille and return or
transfer duct inlet opening such that there is no bypass around the filtration media. Immediately
before occupancy, replace all filtration media with the final design filtration media, installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
• VOCs. Schedule construction procedures to minimize exposure of absorbent materials to VOC
emissions. Complete painting and sealing before storing or installing “dry” materials, which may
accumulate pollutants and release them over time. Store fuels, solvents, and other sources of VOCs
separately from absorbent materials.
• Outdoor Emissions. For renovation projects involving waterproofing, repairing asphalt roofing,
sealing parking lots, or other outdoor activities that generate high VOC emissions, develop a plan to
manage fumes and avoid infiltration to occupied spaces. Comply with the procedures established by
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Asphalt Fume Exposures during the Application
of Hot Asphalt to Roofs (Publication 2003–112).
• Infection Control (Healthcare only). For renovations and additions adjacent to occupied facilities or
phased occupancy in new construction, follow the 2018 editions of the following Facility Guidelines
Institute publications: Guidelines for Design and Construction of Hospitals, Guidelines for Design and
Construction of Outpatient Facilities, and Guidelines for Design and Construction of Residential
Health, Care, and Support Facilities, as well as The Joint Commission Standards to establish an
integrative infection control team comprising the owner, designer, and contractor to evaluate infection
control risk and document the required precautions in a project-specific plan. Use the infection control
risk assessment standard published by the American Society of Healthcare Engineering and the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as a guideline to assess risk and to select mitigation
procedures for construction activities.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 35
Ensure that the IAQ Management Plan is in place before starting aboveground construction, storing
materials onsite, or roughing in mechanical systems. Take photographs of each IAQ measure for
documentation.
The following best practices support successful implementation of the IAQ Management Plan:
• Identify the key players and someone responsible for implementing the IAQ Management Plan, such
as the HVAC installer and the general contractor. Make sure they understand the requirements of the
plan and help champion its goals.
• Include the IAQ Management Plan requirements in contract agreements with subcontractors.
• As subcontractors are selected and deployed on site, familiarize them with the plan and how it will
affect their daily activities. Hold a subcontractors’ orientation meeting to review the plan requirements
as a group.
• Include construction IAQ progress check-ins as a regular item in weekly subcontractor meetings and
safety meetings.
• Provide a copy of the plan on site, preferably posted in an accessible area. Translate the plan into the
languages spoken by subcontractors and their crews.
• General contractors, construction managers, and owners should verify that the IAQ Management
Plan is being followed on job walks, ideally daily, so that issues can be addressed with subcontractors
as necessary. Creating a checklist of major items for easy reference is often effective.
• Decide whether air handlers need to be used during construction. If so, substituting stand-alone
temporary air handlers or heaters may make it easier to meet the HVAC protection requirement. If
permanent air handlers are used during construction, record the filtration media used to meet the
documentation requirements.
• Annotate photographs to indicate each IAQ measure depicted and its general location.
• Provide photographs of the methods employed to protect stored and installed absorptive materials
from moisture damage during construction and preoccupancy.
Indoor Air Quality Assurance
In addition to the requirements above, each project must also prepare for occupancy by ensuring a high
level of indoor air quality. The contractor must evaluate the project schedule at the start of construction
and determine if it is in the best interest of the project occupants to perform a full flush-out of the interior,
regularly occupied spaces (for example, offices, open office areas, conference rooms, workrooms, and
classrooms), or if air testing is appropriate to confirm indoor contaminants are at levels that will not
adversely affect occupants.
The contractor must coordinate with the Tyndall AFB PMO to determine if there is a preferred path,
especially considering the facility type. Regardless of chosen path, the IAQ Management Plan must
document the project team’s decision as a matter of record. The selected path must be implemented after
construction ends and the building has been completely cleaned. All interior finishes, such as millwork,
doors, paint, carpet, acoustic tiles, and movable furnishings (such as workstations and partitions), must
be installed, and major VOC punch list items must be finished.
The contractor must follow UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements,
which refers to ASHRAE 189.1-2014 Section 10.3.1.4, for new construction and renovation of unoccupied
existing buildings.
Flush-out
Document calculations that were performed to determine required duration and system set points, and
reports confirming conditions were met for the full time required. If conditions fall out of compliance range
during the designated timeframe, adjust the overall schedule to accommodate the difference and explain
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
36 04 November 2019
the circumstances via narrative with supporting system reports. All documentation must be added to the
final IAQ Management Plan and provided to the S+R Coordinators to be updated in the SRMP.
Air Testing
Obtain final testing results and reports from the air testing authority. All documentation must be added to
the final IAQ Plan and provided to the S+R Coordinators to be updated in the SRMP.
01 45 00 Quality Control
The S+R Coordinator(s) defined in Section 01 33 29, Sustainability and Resiliency Reporting, in this
document are key members of the Quality Control Organization as defined by UFGS 01 45 00, equivalent
to “LEED Specialist.” The S+R Coordinator is a broader role than a “Commissioning Agent,” who is
responsible for commissioning testing and documentation as defined in Section 01 91 00,
Commissioning. The Design Quality Control Manager and CQC Manager must coordinate with S+R
Coordinators. Include S+R requirements in quality control work plans, testing, daily logs and reports.
Failure to implement S+R requirements is a form of contractual noncompliance.
01 50 00 Temporary Construction Facilities and Controls
Construction projects at Tyndall AFB must reduce and prevent disturbances to surrounding environments
and communities due to construction activities. Such efforts must address noise, vibration, light, glare,
and construction vehicle emissions. All projects impact their surrounding environments; however,
infrastructure projects are often long-term projects that may take years to complete construction. During
this time, it is important for the project to have minimal negative impacts on the immediate and
surrounding community.
The contractor must therefore establish, implement, and maintain a formal Construction Impact Mitigation
Plan (CIMP) during construction for the prime contractor. The CIMP must be drafted prior to start of
construction for discussion, in place at the beginning of construction activities, and cover all project
activities, including anticipated subcontractor work.
The CIMP must address, at a minimum, the following construction impacts together as one plan or as
separate plans as appropriate: noise, vibration, light, glare, construction vehicle emissions, and other
activities anticipated to create nuisance or disturbance to surrounding communities.
For each type of impact, the CIMP must accomplish the following:
• Identify the responsible party for mitigation activities, their contact information, their responsibilities,
and their qualifications. Include information if any portions of the CIMP were prepared by an
outside party.
• Identify the location and distance to the closest receptors for noise, vibration, light, glare, and
air pollution.
• Describe the surrounding land use information (for example, active missions, security zones, access
to buildings, and sensitive habitat).
• List proposed construction activities (for example, demolition, excavation, paving, mass concrete
pours, notable truck hauling operations, foundations, and finishing).
• Identify dates and working hours of proposed construction activities.
• List noise‐, vibration‐, light‐, glare‐ or other nuisance‐generating devices used during construction.
• List mitigating devices and reduction strategies used during each construction activity, including:
− For noise and vibration, specifically, specifications for minimizing construction noise and vibration
should meet or exceed accepted local practices.
− PPE requirements for all site employees.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 37
− A site plan or map showing the locations of any installed controls (include mitigating devices or
strategies for construction phase activities only).
− Signage details and locations communicating construction vehicle idling limits. Vehicle idling is
prohibited; exceptions may be granted for specialty vehicles or circumstances by the Tyndall AFB
PMO.
• Identify procedures for inspection and maintenance of preventive measures and site controls.
• Include permit numbers and agency or local authority policies associated with construction work, as
applicable.
• Describe monitoring standards, methods, and acceptable levels.
• Describe corrective procedures for non‐compliance. Document feedback mechanisms in place for
receiving and responding to public and stakeholder concerns during construction. The construction
contractor is expected to work with affected neighbors to develop construction plans as well as
monitoring and corrective action programs.
• Outline expected staff training needs.
• Include the signature of the responsible party or parties.
The initial CIMP must be provided to the S+R Coordinator for review and inclusion in the larger SRMP.
During construction, the contractor must record any modifications to the CIMP and provide supporting
evidence of the monitoring activities that occur throughout construction. The contractor must maintain
changes to the CIMP in the document so the reader can see how the CIMP has evolved throughout the
project. The contractor must submit a final CIMP to the S+R Coordinator to update the SRMP, and
Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
01 57 23 Temporary Stormwater Pollution Control
Comply with Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) Construction Generic Permit (CGP)
requirements. The CGP outlines the provisions necessary to comply with the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program as administered
through FDEP. It is anticipated that a single overall CGP will be issued for the Rebuild Tyndall program,
and each contract will be responsible to implement the requirements within their work zones. Coordinate
sequencing of work, use of common soil stockpile areas, and construction stormwater pollution best
management practices (BMPs) with the 325th Civil Engineer Squadron (325 CES) Environmental Office to
accommodate work of other contractors.
Requirements
For all projects, the design team must create and implement a SWPPP that includes an ESCP for all
construction activities associated with the project. Regardless of project size, the plans (SWPPP and
ESCP) must conform to erosion and sedimentation requirements of the most current version of the FDEP
erosion and sedimentation control standards and codes.
FDEP SWPPP template is found online at:
https://floridadep.gov/sites/default/files/ConstructionSWPPP.pdf
The ESCP must graphically show on site plans the limits of disturbance, BMP locations, BMP details,
phasing, topography and drainage patterns prior to and after site grading, stormwater conveyances, and
permanent stormwater management practices.
The construction phase of an individual project is considered complete when the site is stabilized,
compliance documentation is complete, and the Tyndall AFB PMO as general permit holder provides
written release from further maintenance responsibility.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
38 04 November 2019
• Videos, photos, and inspection logs that document any issues that arise, as well as documentation
showing their corrective actions; include information regarding the timeframe of corrections.
• Completed and signed SWPPP inspection forms. In accordance with the FDEP GCP, inspections and
corrective actions are to be documented at least once per week and within 24 hours of the end of a
storm event that is 0.50 inch or greater.
Final SWPPP/ESCP documentation must be provided to the S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP,
and Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
01 61 00 Common Product Requirements
Requirements and considerations listed herein apply to materials and products that will be used on all
project types under the guidance of the Pre-Final Tyndall AFB IFS (USAF, 2018). Design teams must
follow the criteria below in the identification of qualifying components for inclusion in final full design
specifications and project drawings. Designers must communicate these requirements as well as
requirements to track material and product data to project contractors via contract documents.
This section enables projects to meet the minimum requirements set forth in various UFC that include
sustainable and resilient product attributes, including those from UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and
Sustainable Building Requirements, as well as strive to address additional measures being discussed in
the design and construction industry as a whole without being overly restricted with additional compliance
thresholds for attributes that have not yet been standardized. Planning for and tracking the additional
measures will enable Tyndall AFB to expand their overall sustainability and resiliency project palettes
during the course of this program while the industry refines and better standardizes its approach.
All Projects
All project types must develop a Material and Product Plan (MPP). The Material and Product Plan must
be led first by the design team’s S+R Coordinator, and then fully developed by the design team. It must
then be communicated to the contractor’s S+R Coordinator and construction team, which will be
responsible for final implementation via informed procurement. The design team must identify a pool of
qualifying materials and products from which the contractor can choose in alignment with Federal project
procurement regulations. The MPP must contain tracking mechanisms developed by the design team as
appropriate to each project, as is already required for vertical projects to ensure compliance with the
Guiding Principles. The working files must be provided to the contractor for use throughout construction.
At project completion, the tracking information—including supporting vendor/manufacturer product
documentation like cut sheets, website snapshots, manufacturer letters, and certificates—must be
provided in electronic format in the final MPP (unless the project authority dictates otherwise) to the S+R
Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP and the Tyndall PMO for record.
The MPP must address each of the topics below, as appropriate to the project type (horizontal versus
vertical).
Reduce Net Embodied Carbon
Much of the design and construction industry is beginning to focus on carbon emissions associated with
both facility operational carbon (that is, energy use) as well as the embodied carbon associated with
product extraction, manufacturing, transport, install, and end-of-life. Projects at Tyndall AFB have an
opportunity to acknowledge their contribution to carbon emissions and take actions to raise awareness
while lowering generation though evaluation of the embodied carbon of their facilities.
By considering Tyndall AFB’s contribution to carbon directly associated with climate change, the
Installation can raise awareness in subsequent projects of a project’s impact while addressing the leading
issue driving the need for resilience. Designing projects to use less material, use material more efficiently,
or specifying materials with lower embodied carbon, as well as reducing transportation distances when
options are available, project teams can reduce the overall impact of the project in significant ways often
with minor adjustments.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 39
Availability of data on the carbon intensity of materials is often limited, and has not yet been standardized
for general use. If data on embodied carbon or material intensity is not available from the manufacturer,
project teams may use averages or generalized data from studies or material databases.
• For projects involving hardscape and vegetation, the Pathfinder Tool developed by Climate Positive
Design (http://app.climatepositivedesign.com/) provides data on carbon intensity of materials and
carbon sequestration capacity by vegetation. This tool enables project teams to track project carbon
footprint and have the opportunity to account for project life-cycle carbon sequestration from
revegetation on the project site.
• Similarly helpful resources for both horizontal and vertical projects are the Carbon Smart Materials
Palette (https://materialspalette.org/) and the Boston Society of Architects resource page for
Embodied Carbon in Buildings (https://www.architects.org/embodied-carbon-in-buildings-conferenceprogram/
conference-resources), which provides myriad resources for all project types.
Project teams should consider the following opportunities to reduce embodied carbon (these strategies
also align with other product requirements within these Technical Guidelines):
• Ask structural and civil engineers to produce multiple material options and compare their carbon
impacts:
− Steel: Specify 90% recycled content or higher for available structural shapes.
− Concrete: Reduce the amount of cement used, provided it does not negatively affect
performance criteria.
• Storefront and Curtain Wall: Use glass and aluminum judiciously and/or consider alternate
materials, as glass and aluminum have high embodied carbon.
• Insulation: Avoid foam, especially extruded polystyrene (XPS). XPS has the highest carbon footprint
of typical foam insulations.
• Framing: Increase metal stud spacing, and/or use Forest Stewardship Council or other approved
certified wood studs where possible (only if approved for use at Tyndall AFB). This minimizes use of
new materials, and avoids negative embodied carbon impacts of deforestation.
• Cladding: Use concrete and masonry judiciously and/or consider alternate materials because
portland cement has very high embodied carbon.
• Material Selection: Select reusable, reconfigurable, and durable materials, especially furniture,
which typically has high embodied carbon.
• Product Sourcing: Prioritize the use of local/regional products and materials, which reduces
transportation-related carbon emissions.
• Wallboard: Specify lighter weight, recycled-content gypsum board when available to minimize the
use and quantities of new materials.
• Ceiling Tiles and Carpet: Specify materials with take-back programs and high recycled content to
minimize use of new materials and promotes a circular economy.
Project teams must explore the embodied carbon impacts associated with each project type and primary
materials in plan form. The team should determine the materials that are the primary contributors to
embodied carbon for the project during construction and operation. The primary materials to be used in
the construction and ongoing operation of the project over its life must then be documented and include
the following:
• The types and general estimates of the quantities of materials used. Operations materials may need
to be multiplied by the frequency of use over the project life. Material estimates should include
anticipated repairs/upkeep (for example, road resurfacing).
• Estimates of the embodied carbon of materials. Estimates may use readily available public
information such as regional, national, or global averages.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
40 04 November 2019
• Identification of the select materials that collectively will make up more than 80% of the total
estimated embodied carbon of the project.
Plans addressing the carbon exploration and any potential change must be included in the MPP in
narrative format. Project teams should track, document, and clearly explain their methodology for
calculating material intensity. The EC3 tool is currently a widely used tool for calculating and evaluating in
a wide array of materials. In some cases, information may come directly from a manufacturer or supplier.
Calculations of the primary contributors to overall embodied carbon and an index of the embodied carbon
calculations of the primary contributors to carbon intensity over the life of the project (construction and
operations). This should include:
• Carbon emissions to produce the material, including raw material extraction, refinement, and
manufacture including secondary or tertiary processing.
• Carbon emissions from transporting the material from the manufacturer to the project site, including
intermediary points.
There are no compliance requirements associated with the carbon metrics, however, teams must explore
information regarding impact, when available. If appropriate, teams may make decisions to alter facility
design or product selection based on information attained; adjustments may be permissible provided they
do not negatively impact other project criteria, such as wind loading requirements, which may outweigh
the material characteristics. Adjustments should not occur if other product requirements are negatively
impacted, such as those associated with Guiding Principles compliance. Any proposed changes must be
reviewed with the S+R Coordinator and Tyndall AFB PMO prior to being implemented.
The resulting composition must be provided to the project S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP and
Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
Horizontal Projects
Use of Recycled Materials
Design teams must incorporate recycled materials use into drawings and specifications for the contractors
to implement. Using recycled, reused, and renewable materials and products—including existing
structures and materials onsite—reduces demand for virgin materials and the embodied carbon
emissions and environmental degradation attributed to their extraction and processing. Using these
materials also reduces waste and supports the market for recycled and reused materials, especially at
local levels. Horizontal projects must use a minimum of 40% (by weight, volume, or cost) of recycled
materials including materials with recycled content and/or reused existing structures or materials per
individual project scope. Projects that lack applicable scope to meet this requirement must provide a
narrative indicating justification to their Tyndall PMO for consideration. Include descriptive narrative and
tracking mechanisms in the Material and Product Plan.
Suggested Strategies
• Soil stabilization methods can be used to reduce the required thickness of a new pavement, thus
reducing the amount of new pavement materials. Soil stabilization processes can also include
incorporating existing pavement structures into new pavement structures. The area treated is
calculated based on the entire area of existing preserved or reconstructed pavement materials.
• Soil stabilization methods may include the use of geosynthetics (geogrids and fabrics) to reduce the
thickness of aggregate required for stabilization of subgrade; the use of geosynthetics to reduce the
thickness of aggregate above the geosynthetics that would have been required for structural support
when subgrade soils are susceptible to pumping and base course intrusion; the use of portland
cement and/or cementitious by‐product materials for soil stabilization for pavement construction, if it
can be demonstrated that this process will reduce the use of natural aggregate (virgin aggregate or
material hauled from an offsite source) use for stabilization; other chemical stabilization; and fractured
slab techniques, including crack‐and‐seat, and rubblization.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 41
• Use recycled asphalt pavement (RAP) or recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) in new pavement lifts or
granular base course or embankments. The recycled materials can originate from the project or other
areas at Tyndall AFB or surrounding areas, and be recycled onsite or offsite. Coordinate with Section
01 74 19, Construction and Demolition Waste Management and Disposal; Section 02 41.13.13,
Paving Removal; Section 32 12 00, Flexible Paving; and Section 32 13 00, Rigid Paving.
• Average recycled content (ARC) must be calculated per the following formula:
• Where: ARC (%) = (Σ rn / Σ Wn) x 100%
− rn = the total weight or volume of RAP or RCA
− Wn = the total weight or volume of either all existing pavement materials or all bedding, backfill,
and granular embankment materials per the method of recycling used
− n = the number of materials considered in accordance with the method used
• Recycle pavement materials in place using cold‐in‐place recycling, hot‐in‐place recycling, and full
depth reclamation methods.
• Reuse the subbase granular material of existing pavement elements as subgrade embankment or as
part of the new subbase during construction of the proposed new pavement structure.
• Strive to relocate and reuse at least 90% of the minor structural elements that meet current code,
including existing luminaires, signal poles, and sign structures required to be removed and/or
relocated onsite or by the agency. If reuse is not possible, identify potential donation avenues;
document quantities and approximate weight to contribute to the construction and demolition waste
management tracking.
• Calculations of recycled materials can be done by weight, volume, or cost, but must remain
consistent throughout the project. Calculations should compare the total quantity of recycled materials
and reused structures with the total quantity of materials on the project. Products that contain a
percentage of recycled material should be factored according to the percentage of material that is
recycled.
• Recycled content is defined in accordance with ISO 14021 as the portion of materials used in a
product that have been diverted from the solid waste stream and used in part or whole in place of a
new primary material. Material eligible for consideration can also be defined as pre-existing material
onsite, or from another site, that was previously a product or piece of equipment that is now being
repurposed or reused.
• To track contributing materials and efforts, project teams must coordinate between designers and
contractors to generate the following documentation for submission to the Tyndall AFB PMO:
− Total quantity of materials used on the project by weight, volume, or cost.
− Inventory of specifications for materials containing recycled content. Inventory should include the
name of the product, the name of the manufacturer, the weight, volume, or cost of the material,
and the percentage of recycled content (either post-industrial or post-consumer recycled content).
− Calculations of percentage of reused or recycled materials by weight, volume, or cost. To
calculate materials with recycled content, multiply the material weight, volume, or cost by the
percentage of recycled content. Mechanical, electrical, water equipment, and their components
may be excluded from the calculations. In these instances, the most efficient equipment should
be specified. Calculations do not include plants, soils, rocks, or water.
− Inventory of existing materials or structures that have been reused. Design documents showing
the location and weight, volume, or cost of reused structures or materials. In determining weight,
volume, or cost, the project team may refer to standard equivalents. The project team must be
able to demonstrate an intentional choice to salvage materials or structures that might otherwise
have been sent to landfills and/or replaced. Provide a narrative to accompany the above required
calculations.
The resulting composition must be provided to the project S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP and
Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
42 04 November 2019
Vertical Projects
Material Content, Product Transparency, Responsible Sourcing, and Reuse Potential: Applicable
to Divisions 3-10, 12, 21, 31-32
The requirements below prioritize efforts implemented on vertical projects to meet material and product
selection criteria listed in UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements, and
others, and strive to address additional measures being discussed in the design and construction industry
as a whole. The UFC categories of Environmentally Preferable Materials, which includes both recycled
content and biologically based (biobased) products, are therefore listed first as required compliance
elements, followed by additional areas that should be included in planning, but that do not have required
compliance thresholds.
Design teams must provide narratives in the MPP describing how they have enabled the contractor to
meet both requirements and aspirational goals as described below. Documentation must identify and
track qualifying material criteria identified and specified during the design phase; the contractor must then
revise the MPP content to identify how they intend to execute the design criteria.
For all products, the MPP must give preference to products that can robustly demonstrate the optimum
combination of the following:
• Projects must meet the requirements for procuring Environmentally Preferable Products. This
category includes both recycled content and biobased products. Refer to UFC 1-200-02, High
Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements, for definitions and resources specific to these
categories. If multiple suppliers are available for a particular material or product, priority must be
given to the one closest in proximity unless this selection negatively impacts compliance with other
design criteria.
− Project teams should strive to document at least 20% (by cost) recycled content of the total
construction cost from Divisions 3-10, 31, and 32.
− Project teams should strive to document at least 3% (by cost) of biobased content of the total
construction cost from Divisions 3-10, 31, and 32.
− Project teams should strive to document at least 25% (by cost) of all materials and products in
combination that conform to one or more of the EPA’s recommended Ecolabels for Federal
purchasing, which can be found online: https://www.epa.gov/greenerproducts/recommendationsspecifications-
standards-and-ecolabels-federal-purchasing#constructionreg
− Product tracking must include the applicable certification including valid certification dates
applicable to when the product was purchased and produced for the project.
• Project teams must provide a plan for consideration of the following additional measures, and
implement product use when determined it is not otherwise detrimental to the project; these attributes
may overlap with aforementioned requirements and goals, and may be included in multiple tracking
categories if the product displays multiple attributes:
− At least 30% (by cost) of all materials and products in the Divisions identified above should, in
combination, conform to one or more of the following:
 At end of life, are more readily reusable or recyclable per manufacturer’s documentation.
 Can be comprehensibly sourced locally within 500 miles of the project site, with supporting
documentation of material extraction, manufacturing, and purchase locations.
 For timber (and timber based) products, the MPP must give preference to products that can
robustly demonstrate one of the following:
o Forest Stewardship Council certification
o Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification scheme
o Sustainable Forestry Initiative certification
o American Tree Farm System
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 43
o CSA Sustainable Forest Management Standard Z-809
o Another certification/assurance that is accepted nationally as an acceptable alternative to
at least one of the above
 Environmental Product Declarations that conform to ISO 14025, 14040, 14044, and EN
15804 or ISO 21930 and have at least a cradle to gate scope.
 The end use product has a published, complete Health Product Declaration with full
disclosure of known hazards in compliance with the Health Product Declaration Open
Standard.
The resulting composition must be provided to the project S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP and
Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
Reduce VOC (Low-Emitting Materials): Applicable to all Divisions
The project team must specify materials and products that have obtained certifications or include labels
that demonstrate compliance with cited minimum requirements as listed below. Project teams must
include targeted materials and tracking mechanisms in the MPP to enable the contractor to meet both
requirements and aspirational goals as described below.
Individual product waivers may be pursued by the contractor as appropriate for specialty applications with
limited product availability. Requests for variances must include original requirements, description of
reason for variance including reasonable efforts made to identify compliant product, product substitution
options, and final approval from the S+R Coordinator and Tyndall AFB PMO. Building products must meet
or exceed the following requirements based on product type:
• Paints, Coatings, Adhesives, Sealants, Carpet Systems, Composite Wood Products, and
Furniture: These products must meet the low- or no-VOC requirements delineated in UFC 1-200-02,
High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements.
Project teams should strive to maximize the use of compliant products in the following categories and
methods to ensure better indoor environmental quality for the building construction team as well as the
occupants. If any of the below listed criteria is deemed in conflict with UFC requirements, the UFC must
take precedence.
• Paints and Coatings: At least 50% of all paints and coatings, by volume or surface area should meet
the VOC emissions evaluation and 100% meet the VOC content evaluation. The paints and coatings
product category includes all interior paints and coatings applied onsite. Research the following
potentially compliant certification programs: Intertek ETL; Materials Analytical Services, LLC (MAS)
Certified Green; Scientific Certification System (SCS) Indoor Advantage Gold (Building Materials);
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Greenguard Gold; Berkeley Analytical ClearChem; Indoor Air Comfort
GOLD.
• Adhesives and Sealants: At least 50% of all adhesives and sealants, by volume or surface area,
should meet the VOC emissions evaluation and 100% meet the VOC content evaluation. The
adhesives and sealants product category include all interior adhesives and sealants applied onsite.
Research the following potentially compliant certification programs: Intertek ETL; MAS Certified
Green; SCS Indoor Advantage Gold (Building Materials); UL Greenguard Gold; Berkeley Analytical
ClearChem; Indoor Air Comfort GOLD.
• Flooring: At least 90% of all flooring, by cost or surface area, should meet the VOC emissions
evaluation or inherently non-emitting sources criteria, or salvaged and reused materials criteria. The
flooring product category includes all types of hard and soft surface flooring (carpet, ceramic, vinyl,
rubber, engineered, solid wood, laminates), wall base, underlayments, and other floor coverings.
Subflooring is excluded. Research the following potentially compliant certification programs:
FloorScore (hard surface flooring and flooring adhesives); Green Label Plus (carpet, adhesive, and
cushion); NSF/ ANSI 332; SCS Indoor Advantage Gold (Building Materials); UL Greenguard Gold;
Berkeley Analytical ClearChem; Indoor Air Comfort GOLD.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
44 04 November 2019
• Wall panels: At least 50% of all wall panels, by cost or surface area, should meet the VOC emissions
evaluation, or inherently non-emitting sources criteria, or salvaged and reused materials criteria. The
wall panels product category includes all finish wall treatments (wall coverings, wall paneling, wall
tile), surface wall structures such as gypsum or plaster, cubicle/curtain/partition walls, trim, doors,
frames, windows, and window treatments. Removable/interchangeable fabric panels, built-in
cabinetry, and vertical structural elements are excluded. Research the following potentially compliant
certification programs: Intertek ETL; MAS Certified Green; SCS Indoor Advantage Gold (Building
Materials); UL Greenguard Gold; Berkeley Analytical ClearChem; Indoor Air Comfort GOLD.
• Ceilings: At least 75% of all ceilings, by cost or surface area, should meet the VOC emissions
evaluation, or inherently non-emitting sources criteria, or salvaged and reused materials criteria. The
ceilings product category includes all ceiling panels, ceiling tile, surface ceiling structures such as
gypsum or plaster, and suspended systems (including canopies and clouds). Overhead structural
elements (exposed, finished, and unfinished) are excluded. Research the following potentially
compliant certification programs: Intertek ETL; MAS Certified Green; SCS Indoor Advantage Gold
(Building Materials); UL Greenguard Gold; Berkeley Analytical ClearChem; Indoor Air Comfort GOLD.
• Insulation: At least 50% of all insulation, should meet the VOC emissions evaluation. The insulation
material category includes all thermal and acoustic boards, batts, rolls, blankets, sound attention fire
blankets, foamed-in place, loose-fill, blown, and sprayed insulation. Insulation for HVAC ducts and
plumbing piping are excluded. Research the following potentially compliant certification programs:
Intertek ETL; MAS Certified Green; SCS Indoor Advantage Gold (Building Materials); UL Greenguard
Gold; Berkeley Analytical ClearChem; Indoor Air Comfort GOLD.
• Furniture: At least 50% of all furniture in the project scope of work, by cost, should meet the VOC
emissions evaluation, or inherently non-emitting sources criteria, or salvaged and reused materials
criteria. The furniture product category includes all stand-alone furniture items purchased for the
project. Research the following potentially compliant certification programs: Business and
International Furniture Manufacturers Association (BIFMA) level (if 7.6.1 and/or 7.6.2 were achieved);
Intertek ETL; MAS Certified Green; SCS Indoor Advantage (and Gold); UL Greenguard Certified
and Gold.
• Composite Wood: At least 75% of all composite wood, by cost or surface area, meets the
Formaldehyde emissions evaluation or salvaged and reused materials criteria. The composite wood
product category includes all particleboard, medium density fiberboard, hardwood veneer plywood,
and structural composite wood not included in the flooring, ceiling, wall panels, or furniture material
categories. Research the following potentially compliant certification programs: third-party certification
list California Air Resources Board (CARB) ultra-low-emitting formaldehyde label or CARB Exempt.
• Healthcare and Child-related Facilities: At least 90%, by volume, of exterior applied products must
meet both the VOC Emissions and VOC Content Evaluations.
− Exterior applied products. Adhesives, sealants, coatings, roofing, and waterproofing materials
applied onsite should meet the VOC limits of CARB 2007 Suggested Control Measure (SCM) for
Architectural Coatings, and South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), Rule 1168,
effective July 1, 2005. Small containers of adhesives and sealants subject to state or Federal
consumer product VOC regulations are exempt.
− Additional insulation requirements: Batt insulation products should contain no added
formaldehyde, including urea formaldehyde, phenol formaldehyde, and urea-extended phenol
formaldehyde.
− Two materials are prohibited and do not count toward total percentage compliance: hot-mopped
asphalt for roofing, and coal tar sealants for parking lots and other paved surfaces.
− Research the following potentially compliant certification programs: Intertek ETL; MAS Certified
Green; SCS Indoor Advantage Gold (Building Materials); UL Greenguard Gold; Berkeley
Analytical ClearChem; Indoor Air Comfort GOLD.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 45
• For all applicable aspirational categories listed above:
− VOC Emissions Evaluation: Product has been tested in accordance with California Department
of Public Health (CDPH) Standard Method v1.1–2010 and complies with the VOC limits in
Table 4-1 of the method.
− VOC Content Evaluation: Product meets the VOC content limits outlined in one of the applicable
standards and for projects in North America, methylene chloride and perchloroethylene may not
be intentionally added. Statement of product compliance must be made by the manufacturer. Any
testing must follow the test method specified in the applicable regulation. If the applicable
regulation requires subtraction of exempt compounds, any content of intentionally added exempt
compounds larger than 1% weight by mass (total exempt compounds) must be disclosed.
 Paints and coatings: CARB 2007 SCM for Architectural Coatings; SCAQMD Rule 1113,
effective June 3, 2011.
 Adhesives and sealants: SCAQMD Rule 1168, July 1, 2005.
− Formaldehyde Emissions Evaluation: Product meets one of the following: EPA Toxic
Substances Control Act Title VI or CARB Airborne Toxic Control Measures for formaldehyde
requirements for ultra-low-emitting formaldehyde resins, or EPA Toxic Substances Control Act
Title VI or CARB Airborne Toxic Control Measures formaldehyde requirements for no added
formaldehyde resins.
− Furniture Emissions Evaluation: Product has been tested in accordance with ANSI/BIFMA
Standard Method M7.1–2011 (R2016) and complies with ANSI/BIFMA e3-2011 Furniture
Sustainability Standard Sections 7.6. Seating products must be evaluated using the seating
scenario. Classroom furniture must be evaluated using the standard school classroom scenario.
Other products should be evaluated using the open plan or private office scenario, as
appropriate. The open plan scenario is more stringent. Statements of product compliance must
include the exposure scenario(s). Organizations that certify manufacturers’ claims must be
accredited under ISO Guide 17065.
• Products that are inherently non-emitting sources of VOCs (stone, ceramic, powder-coated metals,
plated or anodized metal, glass, concrete, clay brick, and unfinished or untreated solid wood flooring)
are considered fully compliant without any VOC emissions testing if they do not include integral
organic based surface coatings, binders, or sealants.
• In addition to the above categorical suggested requirements, a minimum of 20% by cost of the
following newly installed components should contain halogenated flame retardants at less than
100 parts per million (ppm) or the extent allowable by local code:
− Furniture.
− Window and waterproofing membranes, door and window frames, and siding.
− Flooring, ceiling tiles, and wall coverings.
− Piping and electrical cables, conduits, and junction boxes.
− Sound and thermal insulation.
− Duct and pipe insulation.
The resulting composition must be provided to the project S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP and
Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
01 74 19 Construction and Demolition Waste Management and Disposal
Waste management services vary widely from one location to another; therefore, construction teams
should begin by identifying the technologies, haulers, and facilities reasonably available in the Tyndall
area. Planning for construction waste management (CWM) before start of construction allows time to
identify the most effective waste diversion strategies available. Such strategies typically include reuse,
recycling, donation, and salvage; however, source reduction and source separation are also viable and
effective. Source reduction eliminates project waste through prefabrication, modular construction, or
incorporating standard material lengths or sizes into construction documents. Source separation sorts
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
46 04 November 2019
waste onsite into recycling streams, ensuring delivery to the correct facility. Retaining construction and
demolition materials onsite reduces the cost of disposal at a landfill. Rather than viewing them as “waste,”
using construction and demolition materials as resources for new site development reduces the need for
and costs associated with purchasing new materials such as wood, concrete and other types of masonry,
and drywall.
All projects must develop and implement a Construction and Demolition Waste Management Plan
(CDWMP). The CDWMP must account for all materials, including land-clearing debris, materials to be
used for alternative daily cover (ADC), and other materials not contributing to diversion but not included in
the diverted waste total. Material sent to landfills for use as cover is still being disposed of in landfills and
therefore does not meet the intent of this effort. The safe removal and disposal of hazardous materials
must also be covered in the CDWMP. Hazardous materials must be tracked separately and not be
included in the project’s total waste.
• Horizontal projects must pursue an overall diversion rate of at least 50% of structural materials, and
75% of road and infrastructure materials. It is recommended that the project team maximize the
amount of demolished asphalt that is reclaimed as a readily recyclable material. Coordinate with
guidelines in Division 32, Exterior Improvements.
• Vertical projects must pursue an overall diversion rate of at least 75%, striving for 85% or higher,
attained through any combination of strategies appropriate to the project type and scope.
Diversion rate = (Total waste diverted from landfill / Total waste produced by project) × 100
• Establish waste diversion goals for the project by identifying at least three materials (both structural
and nonstructural) targeted for diversion. Approximate a percentage of the overall project waste that
these materials represent.
− It may be easiest to focus on determining the heaviest waste or the waste that generates the
most volume.
− For Horizontal projects, common materials that may be simple to divert include materials
composted onsite or sent to a composting facility, the use of material, if appropriate, as infill,
portland cement concrete, and ferrous and non-ferrous metals.
 Non-composted and non-organic materials should not be added to soil as an amendment
unless these materials can be demonstrated to benefit site soils and planned vegetation.
− For Vertical projects, common materials that may be simple to divert include drywall, acoustical
ceiling tiles, carpet and other flooring, wood, scrap metals, brick, and concrete.
 Finish materials, such as flooring and ceiling tiles, can often be recycled through the major
manufacturers via take-back programs.
 Consider incorporating reuse of finish materials, furniture, or framing into the design early.
Reusing existing materials may require design modifications. Some materials must remain
intact to be reused (for example, drywall) or may require additional preparation (for example,
de-nailing).
− Source reduction strategies should be incorporated into the design of the project and outlined in
the CWM plan. These strategies include modular construction, reduced packaging, using
industry-standard measurements, and prefabrication.
• Specify whether materials will be separated or commingled at the project site and describe the
diversion strategies planned for the project. Describe where the material will be taken and how the
recycling facility will process the material.
− Projects may use a combination of onsite separation and commingled collection, depending on
what is appropriate for the project location, material stream, and available facilities and haulers.
 For onsite separation, common CWM strategies include donation, resale, onsite reuse,
recycling, or refurbishment. Crushing asphalt, concrete, and masonry for infill or aggregate is
also considered onsite waste diversion.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 47
 The most common offsite strategies are incineration, combustion of wood, and sending
commingled waste to a sorting facility. Include wood waste converted to fuel (biofuel) in the
calculations; other types of waste-to-energy are not considered diversion for this effort.
− Establish onsite infrastructure, practices, and policies for offsite sorting, and develop a tracking
system.
• Track all the construction and demolition waste leaving the site. Retain waste hauler reports for
documentation. Record estimated weight or volume of materials reused onsite or salvaged for reuse
on other projects by subcontractors or vendors.
• Retain receipts and estimate weight or volume for materials donated to charities, reuse retailers, or
other recipients that can verify and track incoming and outgoing materials.
At project construction completion, the construction team must provide a final, revised report detailing all
major waste streams generated, including disposal and diversion rates, and all backup documentation,
i.e. hauling receipts and monthly summaries from the hauler. Provide the final CDWMP with supporting
documentation to the S+R Coordinator for inclusion in the SRMP and the Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
01 91 00 Commissioning
The success of Tyndall AFB is predicated on efficient facilities; reliable infrastructure; a safe work
environment for the airmen, support staff, and visitors; and relevant work environments across strategic
domains and performance dimensions.
Given the increasing complexity and interdependency of building systems, a deficiency in any one system
can have a significant impact to the overall operation and performance of other facilities. The operational
team needs to be completely trained for all building systems functionality at the component and system
levels. It is critical to the mission of the Installation that a process for seamlessly transitioning capital
projects from construction to full operational control is implemented.
Assurances can be provided by integrating a total building commissioning program into each new
construction and renovation project. The program extends from planning/DD 1391 development through
activation and occupancy. This section describes key elements of the program. The level of detail for
each component is adjustable to match the size and complexity of the project. For example, a gate house
warrants a simplified Cx plan, while a critical mission or large support building warrants an extensively
detailed Cx plan.
Planning
•Design Intent
•Training
•Warranty
•Asset Naming
•Roles and
Responsibilities
Design
•Design Analysis
•Design Review
•Cx Plan
•Specifications
•TCoO Focus
Construction
•Site Observation
•Submittal Review
•Checklists
•Mock-ups
•Asset Tagging
Turnover
•Functional Testing
•O&M Documents
•Facilitate Training
•CMMS/EAMS
Integration
Operation
•Final Cx Report
•Seasonal Testing
•Warranty Review
•Operational Review
•Measurement and
Verification
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
48 04 November 2019
Planning and Design Phase
• Develop the OPR: Include the overall goals of the project; quality standards; operational and
warranty requirements; training expectations (design analysis, equipment level, and system level);
cost considerations; and measurable performance criteria.
• Develop the Design Analysis: Describe how each element of the OPR will be implemented in the
design.
• Participate in Focused Design Review: Determine if there are systematic errors and to ensure that
training and warranty requirements meet expectations, not to fully check the design accuracy of the
design team.
• Develop Commissioning (Cx) Specification: Define the administrative requirements of the
Commissioning Process and the Commissioning Authority (CxA) involvement with the contractor and
is typically included in the General Conditions. Design teams must edit UFGS 01 91 00.15, Total
Building Commissioning, to fit the project. Fully independent third-party CxA will be used, except for
small buildings with simple systems. All systems that require commissioning must be included in the
project specification.
• Develop the Cx Plan: Describe responsibilities of the commissioning team members, schedule, and
activities through each phase of the project delivery, documentation requirements, communication
channels, and procedures for documenting and resolving situations when verification does not meet
the Owner's Project Requirements. Cx plan includes identification of systems to be checked during
pre-final and final inspection.
• Develop the Measurement and Verification (M&V) Plan: Define the method for evaluating and
tracking the building energy performance.
Construction Phase
• Cx Site Observation During Rough-in: During the construction phase, especially when building
systems are being installed, it is important for key members of the commissioning team to have a
regular onsite presence.
• O&M Documentation Cx Review: The coordination of O&M documentation is often left to the end of
the project and can have a negative impact on how the systems operate over the life of the building.
Early review of these documents results in improved quality and useful tools.
• Warranty Documentation Cx Review: Given the importance of proper system operation over the life
of the buildings, ensuring that equipment warranties meet the O&M team’s requirements is of critical
importance.
• Enterprise Asset Management System (EAMS)/Computerized Maintenance Management
System (CMMS) Integration: The commissioning process should verify that all assets are fully
integrated into the EAMS/CMMS. This process includes:
− Verify the asset tagging information to confirm that the EAMS/CMMS tag aligns with all other
documentation associated with a particular asset. Ideally, the naming protocol is established early
in the project so that it can be carried forward throughout the design and construction process.
− Observe actual asset tag locations and content while onsite is beneficial to confirm consistency.
− Ensue the maintenance practices incorporated in the EAMS/CMMS represent industry best
practices for that particular asset and not just boilerplate O&M data.
− Verify warranty information is properly captured in the EAMS/CMMS can prevent unintentional
repairs on equipment that is under warranty.
• Pre-Functional Testing: Pre-functional checklists (PFCs) are used to ensure the equipment and
systems are installed and operational in accordance with the contract documents and that Functional
Performance Testing (FPT) may proceed without unnecessary delays. The Cx team prepares the
PFCs that address asset labeling, equipment delivery, installation, start-up, and building automation
system configuration for all systems and equipment being commissioned.
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 49
• Equipment Start-up: Is the first chance to observe the equipment in its operating condition and is an
essential part of the Cx process.
• Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing (TAB) Review: TAB is a critical element of the project delivery
process. The CxA should work with construction team to coordinate their activities of the TAB
contractor for each project.
• Training Planning: As part of the training planning process, the training requirements should be
reviewed against the expectations and requirements of the O&M team.
Testing and Training
• Attend Planning Meetings: The Cx team schedules, organizes, leads, and supervises the functional
performance testing, with the involvement of the installing contractors to operate systems. Testing
and training planning sessions should be coordinated with project Red Zone meetings. Sessions will
cover all systems to be commissioned.
• Functional Performance Testing: This is the dynamic testing of systems under full operation.
− An FPT only commences when the pre-functional testing and checklists are complete and
approved by the CxA and O&M team.
− Systems are tested under various modes (such as during low loads, high loads, component
failures, unoccupied, varying outdoor conditions, alarm conditions, and utility failures). The
systems are run through all the Energy Management Control System (EMCS) sequences of
operation and components are verified to be responding as intended. When systems do not pass
a test, issues are clearly documented in an issues log. Items in the log are reviewed and closed
through the issue resolution process. Systems are then re-tested.
− The results of this phase establish the operational baseline for the systems and their
components. The O&M team time commitment can be significant, particularly for a large project.
O&M team participation during FPT is possibly the best method of introducing building systems to
those responsible for operating them. Systems to be commissioned include:
 Building envelope
 Conveyance/vertical transportation
 Electrical
 Energy and water utility metering systems and submeters
 Energy Management and Control Systems
 Fenestration control systems
 Irrigation
 Life safety (fire protection and fire alarm system)
 Low voltage
o Security
o Mass notification
o Distributed antennae
o Synchronized clock system
 Mechanical
 Metering of all systems
 Plumbing
• Integrated Systems Testing (IST): The building systems’ interoperability is verified under a number
of failure scenarios. In critical facilities, this is an industry standard best Cx practice. The primary test
is when the normal power supply to the building is “turned off” and the team observes how the
building systems respond. During this test, not only are generators, fuel systems, and transfer
switching tested, but many other integrated systems are verified for performance under these
conditions. While on normal power and emergency power, the team needs to verify that the EMCS,
fire alarm, security, and other systems continue to operate as designed regardless of power source or
power switching. It is common to find some systems do not perform correctly when switching to
emergency power or back to normal power. The IST process is the first time the O&M team will be
exposed to emergency management procedures related to the new facility and the lessons learned
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 01
50 04 November 2019
are extremely valuable. The results of this testing often drive institutional standard operating
procedures (SOPs) and utility management plans.
• Corrective Action: Corrective Issue Reports (CIRs) are generated by the CxA when issues or
problems arise during the Cx process. The report will describe the problem condition along with any
related reference information and issued to the construction team for corrective action. When the
necessary corrections have been completed, the actions taken are documented and the item is
closed in the issues log. Depending on the nature of the issue or problem, the CxA, along with the
project stakeholders, will determine if re-testing of the equipment or system is necessary. It is
important to have the O&M team engaged during the corrective issues process so the issue is clearly
understood by all parties and everyone understands the resolution.
• Owner Training: Training is one of the most important aspects of turning the project over to the O&M
team. As-built documents, O&M manuals, and all approved submittals should be turned over to the
O&M staff prior to any training. The delivery of close-out materials should be verified by the CxA. The
training must include both component/equipment level and integrated system level sessions. All
training sessions should follow the pre-approved agendas and plans, all attendees should sign the
attendance sheet during the sessions, and a follow-up evaluation is performed to verify the trainees
were provided with the pertinent information to properly operate and maintain the facility. All training
materials should be captured and translated into a format, such as PowerPoint, that allows for new
hire training as well as continuous training of current staff. Training sessions are only effective if
attended by the appropriate personnel. At this point in the transition to operational control, there
should be representation from each responsible shift attending the training sessions for each building
system. This is another critical step in the delivery process.
Post Construction
• Finalize SOPs: One of the keys to achieving operational excellence is having clear, concise
documentation on how the integrated building systems function as a whole. As part of the systems
manual, SOPs for all potential conditions should be provided. These should be developed to allow for
the documents to be laminated and placed on or near the primary system components and control
points. In a “critical to mission” environment, being able to respond to an unplanned incident quickly
and effectively can have a direct impact on mission readiness and being prepared for such an event
is the best way to mitigate that risk. During the development of the standard operating procedures,
the Cx/O&M team plays a vital role where they need to define their team composition and provide
input to the level of detail desired for each system.
• Seasonal/Deferred Testing: Despite all the efforts of the Cx team members to complete all
verification testing prior to project close-out and occupancy, identify any systems that cannot be
tested at this juncture because of project phasing and/or weather conditions. Any seasonal
verification issues will be well documented and the appropriate Cx team members will need to be
convened to carry out these tests. The need for O&M team involvement is crucial because the facility
is now occupied and under their control. These tests will need to be closely coordinated to ensure
occupant comfort and overall life safety is not impacted.
• Warranty Item Review and Verification: Ideally, 10 months into the 12-month warranty period the
team returns to meet with the specific O&M personnel. This process should include and be recorded
in the Final Cx Report:
− Review of O&M experience in operating various systems
− Recommendations for improvement
− Warranty claims registered during the first months of operation
− Record documentation of any warranty items that require follow-up
− Summary of O&M personnel recommendations for system performance enhancements
− O&M staff requests for additional and/or supplementary training sessions
− Suggestions for improvements in the Cx process to be implemented on future projects
• M&V Implementation: To ensure that energy performance goals are achieved, incorporating
measurement and verification elements into the project delivery process is essential. Even though the
facilities will be brand new, the design phase began several years ago and there may be
DIVISION 01 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 51
opportunities for further energy consumption savings. Throughout construction, the team may identify
additional measures that should be considered for future savings.
− M&V should be implemented during the warranty phase and after a full year of occupancy.
− The energy performance of the facilities should be observed, and the performance documented.
Since full occupancy may be well beyond the initial warranty period, the operational team should
review the performance after a full year of occupancy to verify that the true targeted goals are
being achieved and to identify any additional measures that may be implemented.
− The entity that performs the M&V body of work will vary from project to project. The contracting
responsibility should be decided during the planning phase.
• Final EMCS Training: Several training sessions prior to occupancy will help the O&M staff establish
baseline knowledge. The final training will focus on system level operations within the occupied
facility.
• Long-term Training: A long-term training planning should address core competency requirements
that align with the building systems in place. With an ongoing training plan in place, the O&M team
will be able to operate the facilities safely, efficiently, and effectively under all operating conditions.
• Develop Monitoring Based Cx Program: A continuous process to resolve operating issues,
improve comfort, and optimize energy use. Using the successfully commissioned systems as the
baseline, all the operating parameters and sequences of operation are recorded. Through the EMCS,
“trigger” points are identified, and alarms are initiated when a system is performing out of its
optimized range. These points can include efficiency rating (kilowatts per ton [kW/ton]), a setpoint
(static pressure), or total runtime (hours) – individually or in a combination. Monthly reports should be
generated that allow the O&M team to search for anomalies. This process verifies that the building
and systems performance are optimized to meet the current operating requirements, which ultimately
extends the useful life of an asset and reduces the operating costs.
The specific requirements for each project will vary but must incorporate all of the above elements from
planning and design phase through post construction activities.
DIVISION 02 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 53
DIVISION 02 EXISTING CONDITIONS
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, process, and
documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines specific to
Division 02 include the following:
• Survey stakeout for construction quality control and protection of areas to remain undisturbed
• Documentation of hazardous material handling
• Documentation of deconstruction and material recycling
02 20 00 ASSESSMENT
02 21 13 Site Surveys
Site Survey Information
Tyndall AFB is establishing a permanent global positioning system (GPS) base station.
A system of control monumentation is being prepared the 325 CES and includes a combination of
physical monuments and a GPS base station.
In the event that any monuments are disturbed during a site survey, the responsible party must report the
incident to the 325 CES through the Contracting Officer and coordinate the installation of a new
monument and its incorporation into the system by a licensed surveyor in the State of Florida.
Tasks and submittals should include construction survey stakeout and as-built survey as described in
Section 01 45 00, Quality Control. As-built information must be provided by all construction projects in a
geo-located, electronic format meeting USACE and Tyndall AFB geobase formatting standards.
02 26 00 Hazardous Material Assessment
The Government will provide hazardous material assessment results to designers and constructors for
consideration of contaminated soils and groundwater. Design and construction must incorporate
mitigation meeting applicable Federal standards. Mitigation must be coordinated with the 325 CES
Environmental Office.
02 26 23 Asbestos Assessment
Existing Asbestos Information
In addition to other standard asbestos-containing materials, it is known that the Installation has existing
underground concrete pipes that contain asbestos as reinforcement. Prior to any removal or disposal of
concrete pipe, the work must be approved by Installation staff and adequate testing, protection of
personnel, and other measures must be provided.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 02
54 04 November 2019
02 40 00 DEMOLITION AND DECONSTRUCTION
02 41 13.13 Paving Removal
Coordinate with the requirements of Section 01 74 19, Construction Waste Management and Disposal,
and maximize the amount of asphalt and aggregate base demolition material recycled. Process asphalt
demolition material to meet the requirements of RAP for acceptance by a local asphalt supplier.
Coordinate with the requirements of Section 32 12 00, Flexible Paving, for use of RAP in paving.
Portland cement concrete from the site will be crushed and used as recycled concrete aggregate (RCA)
for road base to the extent possible.
02 41 19 Structural Deconstruction
Temporary shoring and bracing provided during structural demolition operations that occur during
hurricane season must be designed to resist forces imposed on the supporting structure due to the
Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements (USAF, 2019b). When demolition operations fall outside of
hurricane season, refer to the latest version of ASCE 37, Design Loads on Structures During
Construction, for permitted wind loading.
Typical construction standards for providing additional bracing or shoring in case of imminent storm must
be allowed as long as the action plan is submitted at the beginning of the project and all materials are
kept onsite. Harden all active construction sites and remove excess materials to minimize risk from
damage of an imminent storm.
DIVISION 03 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 55
DIVISION 03 CONCRETE
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product
submittal, process, and documentation requirements.
All concrete structures must be designed for the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements (USAF, 2019b).
Environmentally preferred concrete in accordance with UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and
Sustainable Building Requirements includes incorporation of recovered materials if appropriate for the
concrete use, and the local availability.
03 30 00 CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE
Cement must be Type I or Type II portland cement, except in areas continuously exposed to sea water,
which must be Type II or Type V portland cement.
Reinforcing that will be exposed to sea water must have corrosion protection or be of a synthetic type not
susceptible to corrosion. Contact between galvanized and raw reinforcing steel is not permitted to prevent
a galvanic reaction. Where transitions are required, use epoxy-coated reinforcement.
For site applications, coordinate with Division 32, Exterior Improvements, and Division 35, Waterway and
Marine Construction.
03 31 00 Structural Concrete
For site applications, coordinate with Division 32, Exterior Improvements.
03 38 00 Post-Tensioned Concrete
Permanently protect unbonded prestressing steel tendons against corrosion by a coating of epoxy,
grease, wax, or other approved material. Tendon sheathing must be sufficient to resist damage and
deterioration during transport, storage, and installation. Damages that may occur must be repaired in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the corrosion-resisting properties must be restored to
prevent intrusion of cement paste.
03 40 00 PRECAST CONCRETE
Cement must be Type I or Type II portland cement, except in areas continuously exposed to sea water,
which must be Type II or Type V portland cement.
Reinforcing that will be exposed to sea water must have corrosion protection or be of a synthetic type not
susceptible to corrosion. Contact between galvanized and raw reinforcing steel is not permitted to prevent
a galvanic reaction. Where transitions are required, use epoxy-coated reinforcement.
DIVISION 04 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 57
DIVISION 04 MASONRY
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to masonry work include the following:
• All masonry structures must be designed for the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements (USAF,
2019b).
• Masonry structures must be designed and detailed to meet all requirements of the High-Velocity
Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the Florida Building Code (FBC) (Chapter 21,
Sections 2118 through 2122).
04 00 00 MASONRY
When used for the exterior envelope, masonry must be fully grouted and must have a protective siliconeenhanced
exterior insulation and finish system or similar coating to protect the interior from water and
moisture infiltration and reinforcement and metal connections from corrosion that may be caused by wind
driven rains and the corrosive marine environment. The masonry finish must be regularly maintained. The
contractor must submit the required maintenance instructions at project completion.
04 05 13 Masonry Mortaring
• Do not use admixtures unless indicated as acceptable in the contract documents. Do not use calcium
chloride in mortar or grout mixes.
• Maintain visual and dimensional consistency of mortar joint widths of 3/8-inch horizontally and
vertically. Joints must be concaved using a concave jointer slightly larger than the joint width. Tool the
exposed joints before the mortar has assumed final set.
04 05 23 Masonry Accessories
• Pre-molded control joint strips must be in accordance with ASTM D 2000: styrene-butadiene rubber
compound, designation 2AA-805 sized for standard sash block and designed to allow movement
while maintaining lateral stability and weather tightness.
• Bond breaker strips must be in accordance with ASTM D 226: Type I, No. 15 asphalt felt.
• Provide integral liquid polymeric concrete masonry unit (CMU) water-repellent and mortar admixture
for exposed CMU. Liquid polymeric admixture must not reduce flexural bond strength. Units made
with integral water repellent, when tested according to ASTM E 514 as a wall assembly made with
mortar containing integral water-repellent manufacturer's mortar additive, with the test period
extended to 24 hours, must show no visible water or leaks on the back of test specimen.
• Apply manufacturer’s standard field finish coat of high solids content non-yellowing clear satin
masonry acrylic sealer for CMU. Apply to walls after clean down and when the walls are dry. Consult
the manufacturer for specific sealer requirements.
• Water retention admixtures may be used to extend the set time of mortar during warm weather to
increase the bond of the mortar.
• Use a sealant and backer rod as specified.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 04
58 04 November 2019
04 20 00 UNIT MASONRY
• Match new surfaces with the size, texture, and color of the existing surface when performing
structural rehabilitation and renovations, and use the same bonding patterns.
• Provide units that are integrally colored during the manufacturing process, with color as selected.
04 21 00 Clay Unit Masonry
• Where brick is used on facades, brick must be type FBX.
04 22 00 Concrete Unit Masonry
• Provide special shapes where required for corners, control joints, headers, lintels, and other
conditions. Outside corners must be bullnose-edged units.
• For achieving color, integral colored CMU or stucco must be used in lieu of painting.
• Masonry units must be hollow load-bearing per ASTM C 90, type II, moisture controlled normal weight
units with manufacturer’s standard color and texture.
• CMU should be manufactured with additives to discourage efflorescence. All mortar must contain
similar admixtures.
• All exterior CMU walls that terminate higher or lower than the building’s roof height must have
stainless-steel cap flashing.
• Environmentally preferred concrete in accordance with UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and
Sustainable Building Requirements, includes incorporation of recovered materials if appropriate for
the concrete use, and the local availability.
04 23 00 GLASS UNIT MASONRY
• Glass unit masonry is limited to only interior usage. Do not use glass unit masonry for openings or an
as an exterior wall system.
DIVISION 05 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 59
DIVISION 05 METALS
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 05 work include the following:
• All metal structures must be designed for the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements(USAF, 2019b).
• Steel-framed structures must be designed and detailed to meet all requirements of the High-Velocity
Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC (Chapter 20, Section 2003, and Chapter
22, Sections 2214 through 2224).
• Applicable manufactured products falling under this category must have a current Miami-Dade NOA
(listed online http://www.miamidade.gov/building/pc-search_app.asp) that demonstrates compliance
with the wind pressures determined from the wind speed, as shown on Figure 5-1
Figure 5-1. Miami-Dade NOA Product Decision Matrix
• Corrosion protection must be provided at the union of dissimilar metals.
• Corrosion protection must be provided for the coastal environment. Use of inherently corrosionresistant
metals (such as stainless steel) is preferred over the use of protective coatings (such as
galvanized steel). Exposed structural steel must be hot-dip galvanized at a minimum. Where
seawater mist exposure is anticipated, provide hot-dip galvanized members coated with an additional
protection layer (that is, high-performance paint or epoxy). Touch-up all coatings following installation
to restore the corrosion protection to the original level.
• Minimize the use of materials in building, hardscape, and landscape construction that can be a
source of pollutants in stormwater, such as, copper and zinc roofs, roof gutters, downspouts, and
siding, galvanized materials (for example, fences, fence posts, guardrails, signposts).
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 05
60 04 November 2019
05 05 10 Protective Coating
Hot-dip galvanize steelwork in accordance with ASTM A123/A123M and apply a zinc-dust, zinc-oxide
primer or an approved galvanizing repair compound.
05 30 00 METAL DECKING
Roof assemblies must have a current Miami-Dade NOA. The NOA must be submitted along with the
product data submittals demonstrating that it is valid and current. The roof deck must comply with the
NOA requirements.
05 40 00 COLD-FORMED METAL FRAMING
Cold-formed metal framing must have a minimum G60 coating for interior applications and a minimum
G90 coating for exterior applications. Avoid bearing cold-formed metal framing directly on the slab-ongrade
at exterior conditions. A 6-inch minimum curb is required to limit corrosion potential.
05 50 00 METAL FABRICATIONS
05 50 13 Extruded Floor Grating Frames
Provide recess frames for extruded 6063-T5 aluminum. Miter the corners to ensure an accurate fit.
Determine the depth of the recess required by the mat thickness, so the top of the recessed mat in the
frame will be flush with adjacent top of finished floor. Anchor the frames in concrete with anchor pins or
bolts. Frames must be used in a recessed area. Construction details of recessed areas must be shown
on the drawings.
05 51 00 Metal Stairs
Stairways and ramps must be designed and constructed to resist flood loads and to minimize transfer of
flood loads to foundations, to break away without causing damage to the main structure, or to be
retractable/able to be raised.
Where stairways are located inside areas enclosed with breakaway walls, exterior doors are required at
the main building entry at the top of the stairs to minimize the entry of wind-driven rain and wave splash
after breakaway walls have failed.
Form metal pans of 12-gauge galvanized structural steel sheets that conform to ASTM A653/A653M,
Grade A, with zinc coating conforming to ASTM A653/A653M and ASTM A924/A924M. Shape the
pans to the configuration indicated at the exterior locations. Provide safety nosing and treads with
cross-hatched surfaces.
Provide safety nosing of extruded aluminum with abrasive inserts. Nosing must be at least 4 inches wide
and 1/4 inch thick and terminating at not more than 6 inches from the ends of treads for stairs and for
platforms and landings. Provide safety nosing with anchors embedded a minimum of 3/4 inch in the
concrete and with tops flush with top of the traffic surface. Nosing must be completely embedded in
concrete before its initial set occurs, and the nosing must finish flush with the top of the concrete surface.
Products must be placed on a flat level substrate. Substrate must meet tolerance of 1/8-inch over 10 feet
in accordance with ACI 302.1R.
DIVISION 05 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 61
05 51 10 Floor Grating Treads and Platforms
Floor grating treads and platforms must have a galvanized finish that conforms to ASTM A123/A123M.
Products must comply with the following:
• Slip resistance must be in accordance with ASTM D 2047, coefficient of friction, minimum 0.60.
• Standard rolling load performance must be 500 pounds per wheel.
• Entrance grating and frame must be from one manufacturer.
• Stainless steel must be Type 316.
Provide a stainless-steel hidden device to secure the floor grating to the concrete surface. Assembly must
allow for ease of maintenance handling per the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Coordinate the top of the product surfaces with swinging doors to provide under-door clearance. Upon
completion of frame installations, provide temporary filler of plywood or fiberboard in the grate recesses,
and cover the fames with protective plywood flooring. Maintain this protection until construction traffic has
ended and the project is nearing substantial completion. Install the product when no further wheeled
construction traffic will occur and wet-type operations, including painting, are complete.
05 52 00 Metal Railings
Metal pipe railings and handrails must comply with Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) requirements.
Provide Type 316 stainless-steel railings, handrails fittings, and anchors. Railings and handrails must
be aluminum with anodized finish. Provide Type 316 stainless-steel railings and handrails where
otherwise required.
Where steel rails are used due to funding constraints, galvanized steel must have a compatible paint
coating. Fiberglass rails may be used for special mission requirements only; fiberglass rails exposed to
the exterior must be provided with two coats elastomeric coating for additional ultraviolet (UV) protection.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) rails are not allowed. All rail systems must meet FBC load requirements.
Aluminum Railings and Handrails
• Railings must be coated with a high-performance coating or anodized in accordance with American
Architectural Manufacturers Association (AAMA) 611, Class I. All fasteners must be Type 316
stainless steel.
Stainless-steel Railings and Handrails
• Stainless-steel railings must have a satin finish Type 316 alloy.
• Integrate handrails with the facility design.
• Steel is not accepted.
05 58 00 Formed Metal Fabrications
• Ladders must be aluminum.
DIVISION 06 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 63
DIVISION 06 WOOD, PLASTICS, AND COMPOSITES
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 06 work include the following:
• All wood-framed, plastic, and composite structures must be designed for the Tyndall AFB wind speed
requirements (USAF, 2019b).
• Wood-framed structures must be designed and detailed to meet all requirements of the High-Velocity
Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC (Chapter 23, Sections 2314 through 2330).
• Plastic and composite structures must be designed and detailed to meet all requirements of the High-
Velocity Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC (Chapter 26, Section 2615).
• Applicable manufactured products for use on building envelopes must have a current Miami-Dade
NOA that demonstrates compliance with the wind pressures determined from the wind speed.
06 00 00 WOOD, PLASTICS, AND COMPOSITES
Due to the potential of decay and termite damage, the use of wood framing should be minimized. Where
used, ensure framing is adequately pressure-treated and that a proper maintenance/inspection program
is created to enhance longevity.
Plywood must be exterior grade and must have full-penetration pressure treatment. Use of particle board
is not permitted.
Protect wood that has been treated with flexible flashing.
Wood, plastic, and composite materials must have a current Miami-Dade NOA. The NOA must be
submitted along with the product data submittals demonstrating that it is current and valid.
06 10 00 ROUGH CARPENTRY
Rough carpentry materials are to be used for project layout, concrete forming, and support of new
construction.
• Preservative-treated materials, to include American Wood Protection Association (AWPA) C2 lumber
and AWPA C9 plywood, must be labeled by an inspection agency that is approved by the American
Lumber Standards Committee Board of Review.
• Concealed members must be used when in contact with masonry or concrete.
• Wood framing members must not be less than 18 inches above grade.
• Fire-retardant-treated materials: Use AWPA C20 lumber, interior Type A treatment, labeled by a
testing and inspecting agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction.
• Provide fire-treated wood blocking as required.
• Dimension Lumber: The following grades must be used per the indicated inspection agency:
− Framing with Dimensional Lumber: Construction or No. 2.
− Miscellaneous Lumber: No. 3 or Standard grade of any species for nailers, blocking, and similar
members.
• Fasteners: Size and type indicated. Where rough carpentry is exposed to weather, in ground contact,
or in area of high relative humidity, provide Type 316 stainless steel.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 06
64 04 November 2019
Unless noted otherwise, rough carpentry must be concealed from view. Moisture content must be a
maximum of 19%. Comply with AWPA C20 or AWPA C27 for fire-retardant treatment. Comply with AWPA
standards for preservative treatment.
06 40 00 ARCHITECTURAL WOODWORK
Comply with the specified provisions of the Architectural Woodwork Institute (AWI) P-208, Quality
Standards Illustrated. The standards for base cabinets and wall cabinets are as follows:
• Wood Casework: AWI Section 400, Premium Grade
• Plastic Laminate Casework: AWI Section 400, Custom Grade
• Wood Paneling: AWI Sections 200 and 500, Premium Grade
• Shop Finishing: AWI Section 1500, Premium Grade
• Installation: AWI Section 1700, Premium Grade
06 41 00 Architectural Wood Casework
Custom-built cabinetry must be all-plywood construction. Approved wet location particle board may be
used for cabinet doors only if laminate selection dictates. Cabinets must, at a minimum, be constructed as
specified, and must meet the standards of AWI’s Architectural Woodwork Quality Standards (latest
edition), for premium grades of interior architectural wood work, construction, finishes, and other
standards, and must be test report verifiable.
Wall and base cabinet assemblies must consist of individual units joined into continuous sections.
Fastenings and anchorage must be accomplished to permit removal and replacement of individual units
without affecting the remainder of the installation.
Countertops must be made of 3/4-inch solid surfacing material. Fabricate tops in one piece, unless
otherwise indicated. Where fabrication requires two pieces, align the adjacent butting solid-surface
material and form the joints seamless without voids. Comply with the solid-surfacing-material
manufacturer's written recommendations for adhesives, sealers, fabrication, and finishing.
Drawers must be removable, equipped with extra heavy duty, full extension guides, and must be
equipped with position stops to avoid accidental complete withdrawals. Shelves must be 3/4-inch thick
minimum and be fixed or adjustable as indicated. Cabinetry construction is typically flush overlay.
Cabinet door hardware must be premium grade and allow for multi directional adjustments.
06 41 16 Plastic-Laminate-Clad Architectural Cabinets
• Laminate-clad Cabinets (Plastic Laminate-covered Casework): Premium grade
• AWI Type of Cabinet Construction: Flush overlay
• Concealed Laminate Cladding for Exposed Surfaces: High-pressure decorative laminate
complying with the following standards:
− Horizontal surfaces other than tops: HGL
− Vertical surfaces: HGS
− Edges: HGS
− Semi exposed surfaces: VGS
• Drawer Sides and Backs: Thermoset decorative overlay
• Drawer Bottoms: Thermoset decorative overlay
DIVISION 07 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 65
DIVISION 07 THERMAL AND MOISTURE
PROTECTION
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 07 work include the following:
• All manufactured products falling under this category must have a current Miami-Dade NOA that
demonstrates compliance with the wind pressures determined from the Tyndall AFB wind speed
requirements (USAF, 2019b).
• This section describes materials required to be used as vapor barriers, exterior finishes, weather
barriers, roof covers, air barriers, and thermal insulation (building insulation) to prevent unwanted
exterior weather-related elements from entering the building.
• A building’s exterior thermal and moisture barrier envelope must have an insulation system with an
R-value to meet the appropriate code-required criteria and meet the designed energy use goals of
the facility. As a resiliency requirement, reducing HVAC power needs through improved building
envelope insulation is a significant means to extend the performance of emergency power resources.
Provide reflective and ENERGY STAR-certified roofing finishing systems. Coordinate with the
energy performance objectives in Division 01, Sustainability and Resilience Performance, and
Section 01 91 00, Commissioning.
• Finish coatings for products under this category must meet manufacturer’s warranty requirements for
coastal environments.
• Avoid use of insulation that, if exposed to water infiltration, can retain water. All metal to be used on
the exterior facade must meet the manufacturers finish standards for coastal environment for
warranties. Consider benefits of selecting of longer life envelope materials exceeding code
minimums.
07 20 00 THERMAL PROTECTION
07 21 00 Thermal Insulation
Exterior wall systems must only use polyisocyanurate or high-density closed-cell polyurethane foam.
Provide a thermal barrier according to authorities with jurisdiction in areas where any polyurethane foam
insulation is exposed.
Miscellaneous voids must use spray polyurethane insulation to fill gaps and provide a continuous thermal
barrier.
Outboard insulation (the “perfect” wall) must have vapor retarders.
Air and water infiltration standards must be met for all envelope barrier assemblies. Perform envelope
commissioning to document compliance with material and installation performance requirements. Report
results to the S+R Coordinator. See Section 01 91 00, Commissioning.
Consider installing radiant barriers with manufacturer’s perforated option directly at the inside face of the
roof deck to reduce cooling loads and to ensure proper passage of moisture through the radiant barrier.
Do not install radiant barriers in such a way that they create a secondary vapor barrier.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 07
66 04 November 2019
07 22 00 Roof and Deck Insulation
Insulate concrete roof slabs and ceilings or attics to improve thermal performance and occupant comfort.
Consider low-emission (formaldehydes), high recycled content, non-ozone-depleting insulation materials.
For roof insulation, provide polyisocyanurate board that is in accordance with ASTM C1289 REV A,
except that the minimum compressive strength must be 20 pounds per square inch (psi) (140 kilopascals)
(Type I, foil faced on both sides).
Use closed-cell rigid polyisocyanurate board insulation for the roof and deck insulation and create
outboard insulation systems that provide the “perfect” thermal and moisture barrier condition with the use
of vapor retarders.
Use glass mat gypsum roof board for the underlayment and cover board that adheres to ASTM
C1177/C1177M, 0 Flame Spread and 0 Smoke Developed when tested in accordance with ASTM E84,
500 psi, Class A, non-combustible, 5/8 inch thick, 4 by 8 feet.
Fasten insulation to resist uplift pressure at the corners, perimeter, and field of the roof to meet the wind
requirements stated herein.
Install cover boards over insulation so the long joints are in continuous straight lines with end joints
staggered between the rows. Loosely butt the cover boards together and fasten to roof deck to resist the
wind load requirements.
07 26 00 Vapor Retarders
Incorporate vapor retarders at exterior wall and roofing assemblies on the humid moisture-laden warm
side of the wall or roof to restrict moisture from entering the facility envelope.
• Polyethylene sheeting, Class 1 with a permeance of less than 0.1 perms, ASTM E 1745, joints taped
• A below-slab vapor barrier having a permeance rating below 0.01 perms
Provide vapor barriers under and around slab-on-grade foundations and footings to prevent moisture
vapor from rising up from the subgrade through the concrete and entering into interior spaces.
Provide a continuous barrier to prevent moisture from entering the building and wall and roof construction
cavities that can lead to moisture problems. When trapped moisture cannot escape, mold forms and
building materials become damaged.
07 27 00 Air Barriers
Air barrier performance is critical to energy performance and building durability because leaking
assemblies allow moist air to penetrate the building, which wastes energy, causes mold, damages
building components, and causes discomfort to those inside.
Air barriers must be continuous across the entire building envelope, including continuity at building
transitions, such as at the foundation to a wall, floor-to-floor openings in walls, and wall-to-roof
assemblies.
Air barrier performance must be tested in accordance with ASTM E779, and the infiltration must not
exceed 0.15 cfm/ft2 of envelope at 75 Pa.
Provide materials in the following categories as used in the air barrier system or assembly of the exterior
wall system are tested and are required to conform to ASTM E2178:
• Self-adhered sheet membranes
• Fluid applied membranes
DIVISION 07 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 67
• Spray polyurethane foam
• Accessory products
An approved construction mock-up must be provided that details the continuous air barrier and
installation of transitions and illustrates a typical wall field area.
Fasten the thermal barrier to the roof deck as required to resist the wind design standard uplift forces with
corrosion-resistant fasteners.
07 30 00 STEEP SLOPE ROOFING
Roofs must be designed to be waterproof, drain quickly, be long-lasting, resilient to the Florida sun, easy
to flash penetrations through, and easy to maintain. Roofs designed to drain with excessive penetrations
and complex configurations are known in the industry as being difficult to flash and waterproof.
Overhangs extensions are acceptable but must provide protection of walls and fenestration below, but not
so wide they will be affected and damaged by high hurricane winds.
Steep-sloped roof designs are preferred to low-slope roofs wherever possible because of the area’s high
rainfall. Steep-sloped roofing systems must be constructed with a preferred slope of 4:12, with strict
adherence to manufactures requirements a 2:12 slope is acceptable to meet architectural design intent.
Sloped roofs may have various geometries. Gable or hip-style roofs are best. A hip-style roof design is
preferred because it has proven resistance to wind uplift forces. Severely steep sloped roofs of greater
than 5:12 pitch should be avoided because they can become “sails” that catch more wind and are subject
to both higher uplift and overturning forces.
07 40 00 ROOFING AND SIDING PANELS
Both the fascia and soffit must be of the same material as the roofing. Vents and piping that must
penetrate a roof must be treated as trim material and painted to match the roof. If possible, such elements
should be located on areas out of view.
Material must be aluminum. Use light-colored roofing materials that have a high solar reflectance, highinfrared
emittance, and good connective heat transfer to reduce heat island effect.
07 41 00 Roof Panels
Furnish the metal roof panel manufacturer’s minimum 20-year no-dollar-limit roof system materials and
installation workmanship warranty, including flashing, components, trim, and accessories necessary for
watertight roof system construction. The warranty must be made directly to the Government, commencing
at time of Government’s acceptance of the roof work.
Do not use less than 18-gauge (1.27 millimeter [mm]). Use roll-form aluminum roof panels. The profile
must be a minimum 2-1/2-inch-high standing seam with a 18 inch coverage. Panels must be formed with
vertical ribs at the panel edges and intermediate stiffening ribs that are symmetrically spaced between the
ribs. The panels must be designed for sequential installation by mechanically attaching panels to supports
using concealed clips that are located under one side of panels, engaging opposite edge of adjacent
panels, and mechanically seaming the panels together.
Continuous roof panels are required unless the length of the roof dictates the use of a splice and this is
acceptable to the Government. If required, locate the roofing splices over, but not attached to, structural
supports. Stagger roof splices and end laps to avoid a four-panel lap splice condition. Install backing
plates at roofing splices.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 07
68 04 November 2019
Provide a self-adhering, high-temperature sheet underlayment over entire roof field. Underlayment must
be a minimum 60 mils thick, consisting of a slip-resistant rubber, with release-paper backing; specifically
designed to withstand high metal temperatures beneath metal roofing. Provide primer according to written
recommendations of underlayment manufacturer.
07 41 10 Attachment Clips
Provide one-piece fixed stainless-steel clips to accommodate thermal movement. Size, shape, thickness,
and capacity must meet the specified insulation thickness and design load criteria.
07 42 00 Wall Panels
Insulated metal wall panels must be of a thickness to satisfy energy codes and energy conservation
goals. Use 24-gauge aluminum metal skins with rigid insulation cores, lap seams, flat, and embossed with
light texture.
Insulated metal wall panels may be used if they are watertight, installed watertight, and are of the
interlocking type to provide a continuous weather tight building envelope.
All breakaway walls in all flood hazard areas must have flood openings.
Uninsulated wall panels must be 18 gauge and similar to the roof panels.
07 42 60 Foam-Insulation Core Wall Panel
Provide factory-formed aluminum wall panel assembly fabricated from two sheets of metal with modified
polyisocyanurate or polyurethane foam insulation core (foamed-in-place) during fabrication with joints
between panels designed to form weather-tight seals. Include accessories required for weather-tight
installation.
07 50 00 MEMBRANE ROOFING
Membrane roofing must be capable of at least 150% elongation, and recovery and must be adhered to
the substrate. The material selected must withstand ponding water, especially if the roof slope is less than
1/2 inch in 12 inches and if the coating is protecting topside insulation. Heavy self-adhering or liquid
applied self-sealing air or vapor barriers should be used.
Due to concerns with heavy rains, heat, mold, and humidity standards, fluid-applied silicone materials
with non-woven polyester full fabric reinforcement and integrated mildewcide/anti-staining agents are the
preferred fluid-applied roofing system, as it is durable, self-cleaning, and has multiple color selections.
Other fluid-applied roofing systems, such as urethane or silicone-based coatings, can be considered if
these systems include continuous full fabric non-woven polyester reinforcement.
Elastomeric roof coating system with color other than white must be warrantied against excessive fading
for 10 years. Roof-coating systems must provide a minimum 20-year warranty.
To reduce heat island effect, use light-colored roofing materials that have a high solar reflectance, highinfrared
emittance, and good connective heat transfer. Low-slope roof (≤2:12) initial solar reflectance
index (SRI) must be 82 or above; steep-slope roof (>2:12) initial SRI must be 39 or above.
Provide roof coatings with low-VOC, recycled content, and bio-based content coatings, if appropriate, and
in compliance with the criteria set forth in Division 01.
For flat roofs, provide an 80-mil thermoplastic polyolefin roofing membrane that is fully adhered.
DIVISION 07 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 69
Flexible walkways must have factory-formed, nonporous, heavy-duty, solid-rubber, slip-resisting, surfacetextured
walkway pads, approximately 3/16-inch (5-mm) thick, and acceptable to the membrane roofing
system manufacturer.
Consider the roof material vulnerability to wildfire wind borne embers as part of material selection.
07 60 00 FLASHING AND SHEET METAL
Flashing and sheet metal are necessary materials to provide building envelope closure and resilience to
weather (close gaps and prevent the weather from penetrating the building envelope).
Specify and use lead-free roofing and flashing.
07 62 00 Sheet Metal Flashing and Trim
Long-lasting flashings, to include copper and stainless steel, should be specified. Flashings must be
resistant to decay from salts. If using anodized, provide an additional coating for coastal environments as
required by the manufacturer.
Provide coping using coil-coated aluminum fastened with cleats on both sides of coping. Terminate the
outer edges in edge strips. Install with sealed lap joints as indicated.
07 70 00 ROOF AND WALL SPECIALTIES AND ACCESSORIES
07 71 00 Roof Specialties
Roof specialties such as soffit vents, eave vents, membrane vents, premanufactured roof penetrations
are required to facilitate that all roof cover penetrations are made watertight, resilient to the weather and
seal out water infiltration.
Penetrations such as vents, roof hatches, skylights, and similar must not be installed in roofs of new
facilities due to previous historical damage from hurricanes which incurred costly water damage.
Eliminate these and similar items unless required by other criteria.
Roof parapets are not to be used to the maximum extent possible because heavy rainfall and hurricanegenerated
windborne flying debris may collect behind these walls and restrict runoff, which could lead to
structural failure. Where facility design warrants roof parapets, the Designer of Record (DOR) must
provide an appropriately designed roof drainage system that will include drain overflows. Roof drain
overflows must be located at all roof drain locations and must be minimum of 4 inches high by
12 inches wide.
07 72 00 Roof Accessories
Roof-mounted equipment and roof penetrations have historically caused or contributed to costly hurricane
damage. Eliminate these and similar items unless required by other criteria.
Design the facility to eliminate roof openings:
• Incorporate wall fenestrations (windows, light shelves, clerestories with hurricane-rated glazing
blocks). Do not use skylights.
• When practical, locate solar water panels, photovoltaic (PV) panels, wind turbines other
electrical equipment,
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 07
70 04 November 2019
• and mechanical equipment at ground level. Fully adhered building-integrated PV systems must
be considered.
• Do not use interior ladders to access roof hatches. Incorporate wall-mounted exterior ladders
complying with ATFP requirements (lockable access, located within a controlled area).
Downspouts are to be prefinished to match the background color against which they are viewed. This
often results in the downspout being painted more than a single color.
All rooftop elements on sloped standing-seam metal roofs that can be viewed must be prefinished to
match the roof color.
Internal roof drains are discouraged; if used, they must be acceptable to the Government.
07 77 00 Wall Specialties
Textured acrylic finish system is acceptable for high-impact environments.
Use of glass fiber reinforcing mesh in the base coats is recommended:
• Back wrap the entire perimeter.
• Use standard-impact reinforcing mesh that is not less than 4.0 ounces per square yard.
• For picture-frame and butterfly corners use, reinforcing mesh not less than 9.5 ounces per
square yard.
07 80 00 FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION
07 84 00 Firestopping
Provide through-penetration firestop systems containing the types of fill materials indicated below:
• Cast-in-place Firestop Devices: Factory-assembled devices for use in cast-in-place concrete floors
and consisting of an outer metallic sleeve lined with an intumescent strip, a radial extended flange
attached to one end of the sleeve for fastening to concrete formwork, and a neoprene gasket
• Fire-rated Cable Pathways: Modules comprised of steel raceway with intumescent foam pads
allowing 0 to 100% cable fill
• Latex Sealants: Single-component latex formulations that do not re-emulsify after cure during
exposure to moisture
• Firestop Devices: Factory-assembled collars formed from galvanized steel and lined with
intumescent material sized to fit specific diameter of penetrant
• Intumescent Composite Sheets: Rigid panels consisting of aluminum-foil-faced elastomeric sheet
bonded to galvanized-steel sheet
• Intumescent Putties: Nonhardening dielectric, water-resistant putties containing no solvents,
inorganic fibers, or silicone compounds
• Intumescent Wrap Strips: Single-component intumescent elastomeric sheets with aluminum foil on
one side
• Mortars: Prepackaged dry mixes consisting of a blend of inorganic binders, hydraulic cement, fillers,
and lightweight aggregate formulated for mixing with water at project site to form a non-shrinking,
homogeneous mortar
• Pillows/Bags: Reusable heat-expanding pillows/bags consisting of glass-fiber cloth cases filled with
a combination of mineral-fiber, water-insoluble expansion agents, and fire-retardant additives
DIVISION 07 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 71
• Silicone Foams: Multicomponent, silicone-based liquid elastomers that, when mixed, expand and
cure in place to produce a flexible, non-shrinking foam
• Silicone Sealants: Moisture-curing, single-component, silicone-based, neutral-curing
elastomeric sealant
Information must be legible and printed with nonfading ink on 20-pound (minimum) pressure-sensitive
and self-adhesive paper. Provide a label for each firestop penetration and include the following
information on each label:
• The words: “Warning—Through-Penetration Firestop System—Do Not Disturb. Notify Building
Management of Any Damage”
• Contractor’s name, address, and phone number
• Through-penetration firestop system designation of applicable testing and inspecting agency, such as
UL System number
• Product type, for example sealant, putty, mortar, or other generic material description
• Date of installation
• Through-penetration firestop system manufacturer’s name
• Installer’s name
07 90 00 JOINT PROTECTION
Preconstruction Compatibility and Adhesion Testing
Submit to the joint-sealant manufacturers eight samples of materials that will contact or affect joint
sealants. Use the manufacturer's standard test method to determine whether priming and other
specific joint preparation techniques are required to obtain rapid, optimum adhesion of joint sealants to
joint substrates.
Preconstruction Field-Adhesion Testing
Before installing sealants, field test their adhesion to the project’s joint substrates. Test the joint sealants
in accordance with Method A, Field-Applied Sealant Joint Hand Pull Tab, in Appendix X1 in
ASTM C 1193 or Method A, Tail Procedure, in ASTM C 1521.
07 92 00 Joint Sealants
Joint sealants are used to prevent water from penetrating into the building through the building joints. All
penetrations and building envelope penetrations where two or more materials are located next to one
another have a space between them. Installing sealant in the joint will stop blowing water from
penetrating into the building envelope, thus adding another layer of resiliency to the building
envelope design.
• Provide sealant materials selected for compatibility with each other and with substrates in each joint
system. Confirm compatibility and application with the sealant material manufacturer to confirm the
proper type of sealant and installation.
• Provide elastomeric sealants that comply with ASTM C 920 for joints between aluminum storefront
and adjacent substrates, tilt-up panels, floor joints, and around plumbing fixtures.
• All exterior precast or tilt-up wall joints must be sealed full height of the joint (both sides).
• Provide latex sealant that complies with ASTM C 834 for interior use at doors and windows.
• Provide silicone sealant that complies with ASTM C 920 for exterior sealant for use in curtain walls.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 07
72 04 November 2019
Floor Joint Sealer
All concrete horizontal and vertical construction joints (concrete, precast concrete, tilt up concrete) must
have a concrete step detail that prevents water from being driven directly through the joint.
All concrete vertical joints must have a lapped or keyed detail that prevents water from being driven
directly through the joint. All joints must be properly prepared and sealed.
Sealants must be applied to joints that incorporate step, lap, or key joints to further provide a positive
weather seal. Sealant joint design, priming, tooling, masking, cleaning, and application must be in
accordance with the general standards of Sealants: A Professionals’ Guide from the Sealant,
Waterproofing & Restoration Institute (2013). All sealants must conform to ASTM C 920.
Joints must include proper backing material for sealant support during application, control of sealant
depth, and to act as a bond breaker. Use filler boards, backer rods, and bond breaker tapes. Confirm with
the sealant manufacturer whether priming should be used. Applied sealant must be tooled. Tooling must
not compact sealant less than the minimum sealant thickness required. Mask adjacent surfaces to control
sealant boundaries during sealant application.
07 95 00 Expansion Control
Exterior Wall Covers: Preformed, foam joint seals are preferred expansion control for exterior vertical
walls. Provide manufacturer's standard joint seal manufactured from open-cell polyurethane foam
impregnated with an acrylic polymer-modified, water-based asphalt emulsion. Foam must have a
minimum density of 10 pounds per cubic foot (160 kg/cu. m). Compression when expanded in joint must
be at approximately 25% of its uncompressed dimension (4x compression). Seal must be factoryproduced
in precompressed sizes in roll or stick form to fit joint widths based on design criteria indicated,
with factory- or field-applied adhesive for bonding to substrates. Alternatives containing wax or wax
compounds must not be permitted. Color must coordinate with building façade.
When preformed are not acceptable for use, provide thermoplastic rubber primary seals retained in
extruded aluminum side frames complete with independent continuous PVC back seal. Side frames must
mount on butyl caulk tape with appropriate anchors 18 inches on center. Color must coordinate with
building facade; multidirectional movement. Heat welded, weather tight transitions.
Wall and Ceiling Covers: For exterior wall to interior partition and for interior partition to suspended
gypsum board ceiling joints, provide joint cover to accommodate both thermal and seismic conditions,
with minimal exposed surface and replaceable gasket. Match color of interior wall finish. For wall to
suspended acoustical panel ceiling joints, provide joint cover to accommodate both thermal and seismic
conditions; surface-mounted covers to match wall and ceiling finishes.
Roof Covers: Exterior Roof Curb to Parapet. Provide elastomeric flexible roof covers made from
continuous neoprene sheet bellows complete with foam support membrane and continuous aluminum
attachment flanges, mechanically fastened to curb member 24 inches on center. Cover must be onepiece
unit with optional back seal. All transitions and end caps must be factory fabricated with butt joints
sealed with site applied flexible splice covers. Provide manufacturer's standard extruded-elastomeric
secondary seal designed to prevent water and moisture infiltration.
Wall and Ceiling Covers: For interior gypsum board ceiling or wall partition joints, provide joint cover to
accommodate both thermal and seismic conditions, surface-mounted to match wall and ceiling finishes.
DIVISION 08 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 73
DIVISION 08 OPENINGS
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 08 work include the following:
• Window and door openings in exterior walls must be designed and installed for the Tyndall AFB wind
speed requirements (USAF, 2019b). Such openings must be designed and detailed to meet all
requirements of the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC for the
applicable sections related to their material types. Openings must also be designed for strength,
security, and heavy use.
• All manufactured products falling under this category must have a current Miami-Dade NOA that
demonstrates compliance with the wind pressures determined from the wind speed. Exterior doors
and windows are critical components of high-velocity wind resistance and have been identified in
post-event analyses as a frequent initial point of failure leading to loss of the building.
• Finish coatings for products under this category must meet manufacturer’s warranty requirements for
coastal environments.
• To address acoustical quality within a building, doors that connect private offices, conference rooms,
classrooms, and dwelling units to other spaces must be constructed with at least two of the following:
− Minimum sound transmission class (STC)-30 acoustical performance, unless otherwise
prescribed higher.
− Gaskets at the head and jamb
− A non-hollow core door
• Include windows and doors in building envelope energy efficiency modeling, and envelope
commissioning. See Section 01 91 00, Commissioning. Optimizing envelope insulation performance
is a key component of sustainability and resilience. Reducing HVAC power needs through improved
building envelope insulation is a significant means to extend the performance of emergency power
resources.
• Comply with Universal Design standards.
08 10 00 DOORS AND FRAMES
All exterior doors must be prefinished at the factory with coatings meeting the manufacturer’s warranty for
coastal environments. Interior doors must be stained and sealed at the factory.
08 12 00 Metal Frames
Steel frames must be fabricated from cold-rolled steel with mitered and continuously welded corners,
formed from 14-gauge galvanized steel for exterior locations and 16-gauge for interior locations. Exterior
frames must be prefinished and interior frames can be shop-primed and shop-finished.
Apply asphaltic coating or auto body undercoating to entire backside of door frames at exterior and
interior walls when grouted solid.
Use minimum 3/16-inch stainless-steel masonry frame jamb anchors in concrete masonry walls and
install metal frames when installing masonry walls.
Provide mortar boxes for grouted frames to protect locations where door hardware will be installed. Grout
frames solid after they are installed.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 08
74 04 November 2019
Reinforce at all hardware locations with galvannealed steel: 7-gauge at hinges and 14-gauge at strike.
Use kerfed frames for gasketed sound and air infiltration control.
Where steel frame doors, windows, or other exterior elements are necessary because aluminum systems
cannot meet the required design strength standards, they must be hot-dipped galvanized steel. Where
elements are too large for hot-dip galvanizing procedures, a zinc coating, a phosphate treatment, and a
shop prime coat of rust-inhibitive paint will be allowed on a case-by-case basis as approved by
Tyndall AFB.
08 12 10 Factory-Applied Enamel Finish
Provide coatings that meet test procedures and acceptance criteria in accordance with Steel Door
Institute (SDI) A250.3 and manufacturers requirements for coastal environments. After factory priming,
apply two coats enamel to exposed surfaces.
08 13 00 Metal Doors
Doors must be made of 14-gauge galvanized steel sheet for exterior locations and 16-gauge for interior
locations. Exterior doors must be prefinished and interior frames can be shop-primed and shop-finished.
Steel doors and frames must comply with ANSI/SDI 100 and SDI 105.
Steel doors must be fabricated from galvanized steel sheets that comply with ASTM A 653/A 653M,
commercial steel, or ASTM A 642/A 642M, drawing quality, with A60 or G60 coating designation, mill
phosphatized.
Exterior hollow metal steel doors must be Grade IV, extra heavy-duty, Model 2, insulated,
seamless design.
Interior hollow metal steel doors must be Grade III, extra heavy-duty, Model 2, insulated,
seamless design.
Exterior swing doors must swing out to allow the frame rabbet to act as a stop that will prevent doors from
blowing in during high-velocity winds. Having door seals compress by the door against the door frame
side allows the rabbets to resist water.
Doors must have Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)-compliant weather-sealed thresholds and
automatic door bottoms or door shoe with drip. Door thresholds must have concrete recessed seats and
Type 316 stainless-steel door sill pan flashing with end dams, rear leg, and turned-down front leg. The top
of door must have Type 316 stainless steel drip with hook at top of exterior door and door frame.
Steel doors and frames must be hot-dipped galvanized and may be used only when aluminum doors
cannot meet the required criteria, such as for force protection, fire ratings, or other requirements.
08 30 00 SPECIALTY DOORS AND FRAMES
08 31 00 Access Doors and Panels
To facilitate access to concealed equipment, provide a stainless-steel access frame and door, continuous
hinge, key access.
DIVISION 08 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 75
08 33 00 Coiling Doors and Grilles
Overhead Doors
Use overhead coiling doors to provide access and egress in and out of the buildings where sectional
doors or swinging doors are not desirable.
• Provide vertical coiling doors as follows: Made from 22-gauge aluminum, insulated with rigid foam
and 26-gauge back covers, with 6-mm clear-float glass panel inserts where requested, and
heavy-duty weather stripping. The track system must be extra heavy duty, 3 inches deep, prefinished
aluminum. Provide a steel or a masonry beam header and steel jambs to install and support door.
• Provide manual chain-operated doors and electric automatic operators where required.
Garage doors, roll-up service doors, and similar doors with large surface areas must be designed to meet
wind load design criteria. The use of center posts and other devices must be considered to reduce large
surface areas and minimize the risk of door failure.
These types of doors must be easily operated manually during power outages. The spaces behind
these service doors must have a barometric pressure release designed to prevent door implosion
during hurricanes.
If used as hurricane shutters for storefronts, windows, or doors, ensure that the assembly is seamlessly
integrated with the building architecture and does not appear as an add-on.
Overhead roll-up doors and door assemblies must be hot-dipped galvanized factory finished with highly
corrosion-resistant paint coating. Provide an easily accessible and user-friendly disconnect to the
automatic door opener to manually operate during power outages. Overhead roll-up doors, door
assemblies, and anchoring systems must comply with Tyndall AFB wind speed criteria (USAF, 2019b).
Depending on the door size, steel may be required for compliance with wind load resistance and force
protection needs.
• Do not install vision panel unless otherwise required.
• Provide nonferrous metal and UV-resistant vinyl weather stripping, including thresholds.
• Roll-up doors must be operated by electric-power with auxiliary manual chain operation.
• Provide stainless-steel bollard protection at both sides of exposed wall systems adjacent to the door
frames. Include bright yellow plastic sleeves to heighten awareness and provide additional corrosion
protection.
Doors must be capable of withstanding the design wind loading of ASCE 7 and still operate normally.
08 34 00 Special Function Doors
At least one exit door or emergency escape/rescue opening must be provided above the elevation
specified for dry floodproofing.
08 34 16 Rolling Hangar Doors
A rolling hangar door is required to provide a secure door for the hangars that house Tyndall AFB’s fighter
planes. Hangar doors must be able to withstand High-Velocity Hurricane Zone force winds and the
Tyndall AFB wind speed criteria (USAF, 2019b).
Operation
Steel rollers for multipaneled rolling doors must be structurally capable of supporting the total weight of
the finished hangar doors. The door operator must be adaptable for either in-door or out-of-door
installation.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 08
76 04 November 2019
Rolling doors must have a fixed-top guide system.
Framing
The basic door panel must be constructed of hot-rolled or cold-formed structural steel shaped with an
insulated metal panel skin on both sides of the steel light-gauge metal frame core. Positive engagement
of the top guide must resist wind uplift conditions. The system must use sealed ball bearings for the guide
and carrier rollers. The fixed top guide system must engage a structural steel angle guide beam and the
top guide system engages an "I" or wide flange beam. Lateral supports for the top guide beams are to be
supplied by others and are to be spaced 8 to 10 feet apart.
Hangar doors must be easily operated manually during power outages. The spaces behind these service
doors must have a barometric pressure release designed to prevent door implosion during hurricanes.
08 39 19 Watertight Doors
Where a study of the site conditions indicates a hazard to a structure from storm surge or localized
flooding, all renovation projects must assess the economic benefits of replacing and renovating the
facility. If renovation is deemed viable, the project must provide protection from the identified flooding risk.
Coordinate with Section 10 71 19, Flood Barriers, and the Tyndall AFB DFE memorandum provided in
Attachment 2 (USAF, 2019a).
08 40 00 ENTRANCES, STOREFRONTS, AND CURTAIN WALLS
08 41 00 Entrances and Storefronts
Provide entrance systems with a medium-style, minimum 1-3/4-inch- thick glazed door, extruded tubular
rail and stile members, mechanically fastened corners, snap-on extruded-aluminum glazing stops,
preformed gaskets, with an ADA-compliant minimum 10-inch bottom rail.
Provide window systems that comply with AAMA/Window and Door Manufacturers Association (WDMA)
101/I.S.2, that contain thermal barriers, and that have condensation resistance factors of 45 and average
U-Values of not more than 0.63 British thermal unit per square foot (Btu/ft2) by h x by degrees Fahrenheit
(°F) per AAMA 1503.1, where h is the heat transfer coefficient.
Provide ADA-compliant heavy-duty hardware with compression weather stripping, butt hinges, push/pulls,
exit devices, wall stops, closers, sweeps, and thresholds.
Aluminum finish must be clear anodized with an additional second protective clear ceramic finish. The
clear coating must meet the manufacturers finish standards for coastal environment.
Minimize the use of storefront systems on primary gathering and critical-designated facilities or occupant
safety and protection.
If hurricane shutters are used for storefronts, windows, or doors, ensure that the assembly is weathertight
and seamlessly integrated with the building architecture and does not appear as an add-on.
08 42 00 Entrances
The DOR must coordinate the use of floor mat grilles with floor drains and trap primers, entrance
vestibules, door and door frame weather seals, or other secondary means to prevent hurricane
wind-driven rains from entering at the facility’s exterior entrances.
DIVISION 08 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 77
All exterior door thresholds and window sills must have step detail that prevents water from being driven
directly under door threshold/window sill. Door thresholds must meet accessibility requirements.
For exterior doors that have glazing, the glazing must comply with USAF and Tyndall AFB
glazing requirements.
All exterior swing doors (including residential) must open outward to provide greater resistance to
wind pressure.
Where applicable, all exterior swing doors must have top and bottom bolts that are push-bar-operated or
manually operated for added protection from hurricane wind forces at door weak points in the exterior
envelope. Ensure applicable code compliance with egress requirements.
To protect against water infiltration, provide a vestibule where possible and weather strip both inner and
outer doors. Provide drainage and water-resistant finishes in vestibules.
All facilities that serve the public must have automatic hardware at entry doors along the accessible route
of travel.
08 43 00 Storefronts
Exterior storefront systems must be heavy-duty commercial quality aluminum systems with doors that
swing outward. Install storefronts in accordance with ASTM E2112. The rough opening must be designed
to prevent water penetration, including into wall cavities that can cause water damage and mold growth.
• Provide insulated low-E glazing set in aluminum frames.
• Provide thermally broken aluminum frames and sill pans.
08 44 00 Curtain Wall and Glazed Assemblies
• Provide insulated low-E glazing set in aluminum frames.
• Provide thermally broken aluminum frames.
08 50 00 WINDOWS
Windows must be heavy-duty, commercial quality aluminum system; and conform to ANSI/ AAMA/
WDMA 101. Fixed-type windows will prevent the infiltration of rain, undesirable hot humid outside air,
and water leakage during hurricane-force rains.
Operable-type windows are allowed at community gathering air-conditioned spaces and sized to meet the
minimum natural ventilation requirements for occupied spaces during prolonged power outages. Operable
windows must open outwards. Unless required by code for emergency escape and rescue use, provide
locks that will discourage the opening of windows during HVAC system operation. For child-fall
prevention, provide window guards at all upper-floor operable windows of housing facilities in compliance
with ASTM F2090-01a. Window guards must not interfere with hurricane shutter operation.
Install windows in accordance with ASTM E-2112 to prevent the infiltration of water into wall cavities. Also
seal exterior wall openings and interior side furred-out walls for water infiltration, which may lead to
moisture and mold problems.
The following are acceptable types of operable exterior windows systems:
• Sliding
• Casement: Side-hinged (colonial) at small single-story and residential facilities, or top-hinged
(awning); awning-type windows must not be located adjacent to walkways
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 08
78 04 November 2019
• Double-hung (not single-hung): provide better reach for maintenance
Provide nonferrous metal and UV-resistant vinyl weather stripping. Weather stripping must be factory
applied, and limit infiltration to 0.25 cfm/ft2 in accordance with ASTM E 283.
Install windows in accordance with ASTM E2112. The rough opening must be continuously flashed and
designed with a step or lap to prevent water penetration including into wall cavities that may cause water
damage and mold growth.
ATFP review and approval are required for the size and shape of windows facing US Highway 98. It is
better design when windows are located higher on walls.
08 71 00 Door Hardware
Provide nonferrous metal and UV-resistant vinyl weather stripping, including on thresholds. Weather
stripping must be factory applied, and limit infiltration to 0.25 cfm/ft2 in accordance with ASTM E 283.
Provide, as far as possible, door hardware of one manufacturer’s make. All hardware must be clearly and
permanently marked by the manufacturer where it will be visible after installation.
• All hardware must be Type 316 stainless steel. If Type 316 is not available either as the standard or
as a custom option, then the next highest corrosion-resistant stainless steel must be used.
• Hardware must comply with the ADA Accessibility Guidelines.
• Exterior doors must have seals and door bottoms that prevent wind-driven rain from entering.
Hardware must include threshold, door bottom, and weather seal. All exterior doors must have concrete
step detail that prevents water from being driven directly under door sills and thresholds, and comply with
accessibility. Exterior doors and garage doors must have weather seals and automatic door bottoms
(swing doors) to prevent wind-driven rain from entering facility spaces.
• Provide ball bearing hinges, stainless-steel hinges, and stainless-steel pins for the exterior. Provide
three hinges for 1-3/4-inch-thick doors less than 90 inches in height and four hinges for doors more
than 90 inches in height, and include nonremovable hinge pins.
• All locksets/latch sets must be extra heavy duty commercial grade with ADA-compliant lever handles.
Locksets, exit devices, and other locks must exceed Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association
(BHMA) A156 Grade 1.
• Provide closers with adjustable delayed opening feature and 90-degree arms.
• Provide panic exit devices listed and labeled for panic protection, based on testing in accordance with
UL 305.
• Provide thresholds with metal members that have compressible vinyl seals that seal against the door.
The base metal must be aluminum.
• Provide surface-mounted neoprene sweeps with beveled edges that seal against the threshold.
• Provide wall stops as the condition dictates. Use floor stops only if wall stops will not work and if the
floor stops will not impede traffic.
• Provide continuous weather-strip gasketing on exterior doors. Provide noncorrosive fasteners for
exterior applications and elsewhere as indicated.
All exterior and interior window hardware, fasteners, and similar must be Type 316 stainless steel, unless
Type 316 is not manufactured for a particular hardware element. This is to provide corrosion protection
and to prevent galvanic action between dissimilar metals with the aluminum window frame. Hardware
must include threshold, door bottom, and weather seal.
DIVISION 08 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 79
Locksets and cores must be purchased by the contractor. The contractor must provide construction
cores.
08 80 00 GLAZING
Because of the ATFP requirements, high wind velocities, and potential exposure to flying debris, exterior
glazing must be laminated glass. Exterior windows must include an insulated glazing system (low-E outer
lite plus air space plus interior lite. The contractor must submit required third-party certification for impact
resistance. At a minimum, exterior lite must be tempered and interior lite must be 1/4-inch-thick laminated
glass with 0.75-mm-thick polyvinyl butyral interlayer.
Consider building energy efficiency, occupant comfort, daylighting, acoustic performance, and security
when selecting exterior window and glazing systems. Consider high performance glazing units with
low-emissivity (low-e) coatings with high visible light transmittance for better daylighting and a low solar
heat gain coefficient in accordance the National Fenestration Rating Council and local energy code.
Prioritize energy-efficiency-related glazing attributes on most-impacted façade(s) if not feasible for all
building facades.
Use bird-friendly glazing techniques to reduce bird strike injuries and deaths, such as the use of etching
or fritting or adding a patterned, UV-reflective coating that is not visible to human eyes but is to birds.
This strategy aligns with sustainability measures to reduce bird mortality, particularly for the coastal and
wetland species. Refer to https://abcbirds.org/program/glass-collisions/bird-friendly-design/ for
additional information.
Coordinate glazing tint with sustainability recommendations and energy requirements.
08 90 00 LOUVERS AND VENTS
08 91 00 Louvers
Where located below the established Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a), specify Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)-compliant flood vents.
All louvers must be storm-resistant and meet the Tyndall AFB wind load design requirements (USAF,
2019b).
If required, exterior louvers and screens must be anodized aluminum, finished in an approved color and
designed and installed to be compatible with the exterior building elements. Exterior aluminum louvers
with stainless-steel mesh must be designed to meet wind load design criteria.
Louvers with stainless-steel mesh must be designed to prevent the infiltration of hurricane wind-driven
rain and pests into the building interior. All hardware, brackets, and similar, must be Type 316
stainless steel.
DIVISION 09 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 81
DIVISION 09 FINISHES
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 09 work include the following:
• Long life materials in the coastal subtropical environment
• Resistance to humidity, mold and mildew
• Low VOC standards
For vertical projects, at least 90% of the regularly occupied floor area must meet or exceed the following
thresholds for area-weighted average surface reflectance:
• 85% for ceilings
• 60% for walls
• 25% for floors
Specifying surfaces with high reflectance helps make the space brighter through reflection, minimizing the
difficulty of viewing light documents on dark surfaces; the specific surface reflectance values for ceilings,
walls, and floors are above the standard industry assumptions of 80, 50, and 20, respectively, as
recommended in the latest edition of the IES Lighting Handbook.
Submittals of materials for outdoor use must document compliance with the following tests:
• Salt Spray Test: A sample of the sheets must withstand a salt spray test for a minimum of
1,000 hours in accordance with ASTM B177, including the scribe requirements in the test, the coating
must contain blisters larger than No. 8 on no more than 20% of exposed area.
• Accelerated Weathering (chalking resistance and color change): A sample of the sheets must
withstand a weathering test a minimum of 2,000 hours in accordance with ASTM G23, using a
Type D apparatus, without cracking, peeling, blistering, loss of adhesion of the protective coating, or
corrosion of the base metal. Protective coating that can be readily removed from the base metal with
a pen-knife blade or similar instrument must be considered as an area indicating loss of adhesion.
After the 2,000-hour weatherometer test, exterior coating change must not exceed two National
Bureau of Standard units in accordance with ASTM D2244.
• Humidity Test: When subjected to a humidity cabinet test in accordance with ASTM D 2247 for
1,000 hours, a scored panel must show no signs of blistering, cracking, creepage, or corrosion.
• Abrasion-resistant Test: When subjected to the falling sand test in accordance with ASTM D968,
the coating system must withstand a minimum of 30 liters of sand before the appearance of the
base metal.
09 00 00 FINISHES
Use breathable, water-resistant, non-cellulose (no wood byproduct), and mildew-resistant interior finishes
and materials. Use paperless (glass mat) gypsum board, fiberglass mesh tape, acrylic paints that breathe,
ceramic coated wall board screws, galvanized G90 light-gauge framing, and non-cellulose spray on foam
insulation where needed.
Durability, maintenance, and cost-efficiency are primary considerations in choosing interior finishes.
Neutral base colors with contrasting accented accessories should be applied when appropriate. Specialty
areas may have specific requirements that need to be determined on an individual basis. The designer
must consider the applicable UFC, building codes, fire ratings, acoustical performance, structural needs,
and thermal and moisture transmission characteristics when designing project-specific interior
assemblies. Where a conflict exists within this standard and other applicable codes or standards, the
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 09
82 04 November 2019
more stringent must apply. If a selected material subsequently proves to be unavailable during design or
construction, samples of alternative materials must be submitted for approval, prior to placing orders.
Permanent finishes are generally the hard surface structural interior design finishes that will last 15 to
20 years and whose removal and re-installation is a major disruption to the facility. Such items as vinyl
composition tile (VCT), ceramic and other surface tile, plastic laminates, toilet partitions, lockers, window
blinds, all modular or systems furniture panels, work surfaces, flipper doors, and similar are considered
permanent finishes. Generally permanent finishes need to be a color that will not become dated in a
few years.
09 20 00 PLASTER AND GYPSUM BOARD
09 21 00 Plaster and Gypsum Board Assemblies
Cement Plaster
CMU walls typically have a 10-mm portland cement plaster application using an acrylic admixture to give
additional moisture suppression to control fungus growth plus an elastomeric coating. The DOR should
consider performance differences between options with the project-specific requirements.
Stucco (integrally colored cement plaster) is not allowed.
09 28 00 Backing Boards and Underlayments
Gypsum board must be manufactured in accordance with ASTM C 1177 with glass mats both sides and
long edges, water-resistant core. Treat joints and fasteners as recommended by the barrier manufacturer
and in accordance with local building code requirements.
Fasteners used for securing treated wood must be protected from galvanic reaction, must be
noncorrosive, and as follows:
• Stainless steel
• Heavily coated, hot-dipped fasteners
• Ceramic-coated fasteners
• Compatible with treated wood (as recommended by the manufacturer)
Seal sheathing joints in accordance with the sheathing manufacturer's written instructions.
• Apply elastomeric sealant to joints and fasteners and trowel flat. Seal other penetrations and
openings.
• Apply glass-fiber sheathing tape to glass-mat gypsum sheathing board joints, and apply and trowel
silicone emulsion sealant to embed tape in sealant. Apply sealant to exposed fasteners. Seal other
penetrations and openings.
• Apply sheathing tape to joints between foam-plastic sheathing panels and at items penetrating
sheathing. Apply at upstanding flashing to overlap both flashing and sheathing.
Apply flexible flashing where indicated to comply with manufacturers written instructions.
• Lap seams and junctures with other materials at least 4 inches, except that at flashing flanges of
other construction, laps need not exceed flange width.
• Lap flashing over weather-resistant building paper at bottom and sides of openings.
• Lap weather-resistant building paper over flashing at heads of openings.
• After flashing has been applied, roll surfaces with a hard rubber or metal roller.
DIVISION 09 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 83
09 29 00 Gypsum Board
• Metal framing for walls must comply with ASTM C 645 and ceilings must comply with ASTM C 645
and ASTM C 754.
• Demising walls must have minimum 6-inch, 16-gauge structural steel studs, at 16 inches on center.
• Provide glass-mat gypsum board in accordance with ASTM C 1658/C 1658M or ASTM C 1178, in 5/8
inch thickness, with fiberglass mat laminated to both sides. Specifically designed for interior use:
− Regular type, unless otherwise indicated
− Type X where required for fire-resistance-rated assemblies
− Sag-resistant type for ceiling surfaces
− Water-resistant gypsum board for all wet wall areas
• Provide normal weight joint compound for embedding tape and first coat. For fill and finish coats,
provide light or normal weight joint compound.
• Comply with the requirements of GA 238 to prevent the growth of mold on gypsum board.
• Installation and finish of gypsum wall panels must comply with ASTM C 840 and GA-216. Provide a
Level 4 finish, unless otherwise indicated. Extend finishes to the bottom edge of the gypsum board
unless otherwise directed.
• Provide a Level 5 at walls and long corridors with high-gloss paint or walls that are exposed to direct
lighting (recessed, spot lighting or natural) or where indicated.
• Imported board is not allowed.
09 30 00 TILING
All tile work must be performed only by companies that are members of the Tile Council of North America
(TCNA) and must comply with the latest TCNA installation handbook.
• Do not install porous surfaces in high-traffic areas.
• Use lower absorption-level tiles to have a greater resistance against stains.
• Install larger tiles, 12 inches by 12 inches, in high-traffic areas to minimize grout lines.
Breaking Strength: In order to determine the strength and durability of ceramic tile, a standard test
method (ASTM C648) is used to evaluate the tile. A force is applied to an unsupported portion of the tile
specimen until breakage occurs. The ultimate breaking strength is then recorded in pounds. The ANSI
standard requires an average breaking strength of 250 pounds for floor tile.
Coefficient of Friction: This is a term used in physics to describe the amount of force required to cause
an object to start moving across a surface. Tiles are tested for coefficient of friction in accordance with
ASTM C-1028. A quantitative value can be determined to generally express the relative degree of slip
resistance. A higher coefficient indicates increased resistance. Although there is no current ANSI
requirement, a minimum coefficient of friction of 0.50 (wet and dry) is the recognized industry standard for
a slip-resistant flooring surface. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) also
recommends this same standard for walking surfaces. The ADA recommends a minimum coefficient of
friction of 0.60 (wet and dry) for accessible routes and 0.80 for ramps.
Scratch Hardness (Mohs Hardness): The relative hardness of glazed tile is an important issue that
should be addressed when selecting tile. Scratch resistance of glazes is measured by scratching the
surface of the tile with different minerals and assigning a “Mohs Scale Hardness” number to the glaze, the
softest mineral used is talc (a rating of 1) and the hardest is a diamond (a rating of 10 if no scratch). Most
glazes used on ceramic tile fall in the five to six range, which is also slightly harder than most steels.
Case-hardened steel, such as what is used in drill bits, is approximately six and will scratch most glazes.
Quartz, No. 7 on the Mohs scale, will scratch most glazes (sand is a common example of natural quartz).
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 09
84 04 November 2019
Tile is appropriate for all areas that may be subject to high foot traffic, wetness, and require the need for
increased durability, for example, dining facilities, kitchens, break rooms, restrooms, entry lobbies, floors,
walls, and similar.
Technical Criteria: Select tile based on the performance criteria appropriate for the functional use of the
space. There are five properties of ceramic tile to consider: coefficient of friction, durability classification or
Porcelain Enamel Institute, scratch hardness, breaking strength, and water absorption.
Select tiles with the following properties:
• Coefficient of Friction: Floor tile must have a minimum coefficient of friction of 0.60 (wet and dry) or
higher in accordance with ASTM C-1028. Standing water and other contaminants create slippery
conditions for any hard surface floor material. Floor applications with exposure to these conditions
require extra caution in the tile selection. Use abrasive grains or raised textured tile for greater
traction in areas with the possibility of standing water or grease build up.
• Durability Classification: Floor tile must be Class IV—Heavy Traffic, durability classification as rated
by the manufacturer when tested in accordance with ASTM C-1027 for abrasion resistance as related
to foot traffic. Class III can be considered for residential installations.
• Scratch Hardness: Glazed floor tile must have a scratch hardness of 6.0 or higher. Do not use
glazed tile in areas of high abuse where possible tile breakage may occur. Avoid high gloss or
polished tiles for areas with high traffic; use only as accents in floor patterns.
• Breaking Strength: Tile must be impact-resistant with a minimum breaking strength of 250 pounds in
accordance with ASTM C-648.
• Water Absorption: Use only vitreous or impervious tile for most applications in accordance with
ASTM C-373.
Functional/Aesthetic Criteria: Some products work better in certain functional areas than others. The
pattern, texture, and color or combination of colors will greatly influence the overall appearance of tile.
Consider the amount of cleaning and maintenance required when selecting particular tiles and grouts.
• Slip Resistance: This is a major factor in the selection of tiles for kitchens and entrance lobbies.
There are numerous products that have slip-resisting features for lobbies. Unglazed quarry tile works
best for commercial kitchen floor installations. Because of the possibility of water and grease spillage,
unglazed tile must be sealed in kitchens.
• Color: Recommend tile with through-color, that is, color the entire thickness of the tile body. Avoid
solid color tiles unless designed into a pattern. Avoid light-colored quarry tile in commercial kitchens.
Colors and patterns must be approved by the Government.
• Texture: Tiles with a textured surface and an interesting variation of colors will tend to show less
surface soiling.
• Grout: Select medium to dark pigmented grouts. Light grouts tend to change color and trap soil over
time. Minimize the visibility of grout by using larger-sized tile.
• Base: Use a matching tile base in commercial kitchens and other areas subject to excessive water. In
other locations, wood or vinyl base may be appropriate. Ensure that there is an aesthetical transition
If possible, use a dark tone grout, which coordinates with the floor tile to avoid a stained or soiled
appearance.
DIVISION 09 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 85
09 50 00 CEILINGS
09 53 00 Acoustical Ceiling Suspension Assemblies
• Provide ceiling suspension that meets seismic requirements under the International Building Code.
• Wire hangers, braces, and ties: Use zinc-coated carbon-steel; ASTM A 641, Class 1 zinc coating,
soft temper.
• Tiles must be snug to grid, and the grid must be square and level. Penetrations must be centered in
tiles and the system must be centered within room.
• Install hold-down clips were required to resist wind uplift.
09 60 00 FLOORING
Use products that are moisture and mold/mildew-resistant, such as hard tiles with breathable grout joints
and breathable sealed concrete. Use only ceramic tile floor tiles, terrazzo, or other nonabsorbent floor
finishes on first floors and slabs on grade especially at entrance areas where hurricane flooding
can occur.
Functional/Aesthetic Criteria: Some products work better in certain functional areas than others. The
pattern, texture, and color or combination of colors will greatly influence the overall appearance of tile.
Consider the amount of cleaning and maintenance required when selecting particular tiles and grouts.
• Slip Resistance: This is a major factor in the selection of tiles for kitchens and entrance lobbies.
There are numerous products that have slip-resisting features for lobbies. Unglazed quarry tile works
best for commercial kitchen floor installations. Because of the possibility of water and grease spillage,
unglazed tile must be sealed in kitchens.
• Color: Recommend tile with through-color, that is, color through the entire thickness of the tile body.
Avoid solid color tiles unless designed into a pattern. Avoid light-colored quarry tile in commercial
kitchens. Colors and patterns must be approved by the Government.
• Texture: Tiles with a textured surface and an interesting variation of colors will tend to show less
surface soiling.
• Grout: Select medium to dark pigmented grouts. Light grouts tend to change color and trap soil over
a period of time. Minimize the visibility of grout by using larger-sized tile.
• Base: Use a matching tile base in commercial kitchens and other areas subject to excessive water. In
other locations, wood or vinyl base may be appropriate. Ensure there is a visually pleasing transition
between different materials.
09 61 36 Static-Resistant Flooring Treatment
Static-dissipative VCT (non-asbestos formulated) must be used in server rooms and other areas.
09 64 00 Wood Flooring
Wood flooring must breathe and be termite-resistant.
Verify the underlayment surface is free of irregularities and substances that may interfere with adhesive
bond or show through the surface.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 09
86 04 November 2019
09 65 00 Resilient Flooring
Resilient Tile
Except where noted, all corridors, labs, and support areas must receive resilient tile flooring
Welded seam rubber sheet flooring is an alternative to resilient flooring. Depending on chemical usage
and traffic, welded seam rubber flooring with a minimum thickness of 3.0 mm, may be an acceptable
alternative to resilient tile flooring in some laboratories, lab support areas, and equipment areas.
Resilient Base and Accessories
All resilient tile floors must have a 4- or 6-inch rubber base in color to match existing new base, be a
minimum of 1/8-inch thick, and in a color selected by the architect. All fixed casework must have a 4-inch
rubber base. Prefabricated or formed corners should not be used.
Performance Characteristics and Other Criteria
• Provide resistant tile flooring per ASTM F 1344, Class I-A, Homogeneous Rubber tile.
• Provide resistant tile flooring per F2195, Class III, Linoleum Tile 2.5 mm.
• Provide rubber strip that produces a smooth transition and protects exposed edges of tile and carpet.
• Provide rubber, per ASTM F1861, type TS (rubber, vulcanized, thermoset), Group I (solid,
homogeneous).cove top toe 4-inch base with a minimum thickness of 0.80.
Avoid using sheet flooring on concrete floor slabs as these flooring types trap moisture. Resilient sheet
flooring and resilient tile flooring are extremely difficult to install in hot, humid climates and require
rigorous installation procedures to eliminate moisture-caused adhesion failure of the flooring to concrete
slab-on-grade substrates.
Resilient flooring tiles must comply with the requirements of Section 09 30 00, Tiling. Adhesives must
comply with VOC standards set forth in Division 01.
Do not install porous surfaces in high-traffic zones.
Use lower absorption-level tiles for a greater resistance against stains.
09 67 00 Fluid-Applied Flooring
Resinous flooring can be used in containment and chemically intensive areas.
Within containment spaces and other spaces where applicable, a troweled resinous floor system should
be used.
System Characteristics
• Wearing Surface: Manufacturer’s standard orange-peel texture
• Integral Cove Base: 4 inches high
• Overall System Thickness: 1/4 inch
System Components
Manufacturer’s standard components for an epoxy mortar system that are compatible with each other and
as follows:
• Waterproofing Membrane: Type recommended by manufacturer for substrate and body coats
indicated:
− Formula Description: 100% solids
DIVISION 09 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 87
• Body Coats:
− Resin: Urethane
− Formulation Description: 100% solids
− Application Method: Self-leveling
− Thickness of Coats: 1/4-8 inch
− Number of Coats: One
− Aggregates: Manufacturer’s standard blended with inorganic pigments
• Primer: Type recommended by manufacturer for substrate and body coats indicated:
− Formula Description: 100% solids urethane primer
• Reinforcing Membrane: Flexible resin formulation that is recommended by manufacturer for
substrate and primer and body coat(s) indicated and that prevents substrate cracks from reflecting
through resinous flooring:
− Formulation description: 100% solids
− Provide fiberglass scrim embedded in reinforcing membrane
• Topcoat: Chemical-resistant sealing or finish coats:
− Resin: Urethane
− Formulation Description: 100% solids
− Type: Pigmented
− Finish: Matte
− Number of Coats: One
− Thickness of Coats: 1/8 inch
09 68 00 Carpeting
Carpeting should not be used within laboratory environments. Do not use carpet and carpet pads that do
not breathe. Do not use carpet in areas subject to flooding, staining, and high foot traffic.
All work must be performed by contractors/installers who are Certified Floor-covering Installers from the
International Certified Flooring Installer Association or manufacturer approved installer.
Provide low-VOC products for carpet, adhesives, sealants, and carpet cushions as set forth in the criteria
outlined in Division 01.
Environmental Limitations
Do not install carpet until wet work in spaces is complete and dry, and ambient temperature and humidity
conditions are maintained at the levels indicated for Project when occupied for its intended use.
Bonded polyurethane carpet cushion must contain the highest practicable percentage of material that has
been recovered or diverted from solid waste (for example, post-consumer waste), but not including
material reused in a manufacturing process. Where two materials have comparable price and
performance, the one having the higher recovered-material content must be selected.
Concrete Subfloors
Verify that concrete slabs comply with ASTM F 710 and the following:
• Slab substrates are dry and free of curing compounds, sealers, hardeners, and other materials that
may interfere with adhesive bond.
• Determine adhesion and dryness characteristics by performing bond and moisture tests
recommended by the following:
− Carpet manufacturer.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 09
88 04 November 2019
− Carpet cushion manufacturer. Subfloors are free of cracks, ridges, depressions, scale, and
foreign deposits.
Be careful not to overdo borders. In corridors, a border of approximately 9 inches wide is appropriate.
09 70 00 WALL FINISHES
Wall materials must be chosen based on the function of the facility and the materials of the adjacent
structures. The goal is to limit the pallet of materials used on the Installation and ease the transition
between the wide variety of existing materials by adjusting the proportions and details of the approved
materials. Consistent application of colors and materials will unify the look of the Installation and reduce
visual clutter caused by too much diversity.
Use only Installation-standard materials and colors. Minimize surfaces requiring painting and cleaning.
Use integral colored materials and factory finished building products to reduce maintenance.
Use sealant to match or blend with surface materials and color.
09 72 00 Wall Coverings
Do not use vinyl wall coverings and other wall coverings, paneling, paints, solid back splashes, and other
materials that do not breathe because it can create a second vapor barrier that traps moisture within
construction and cause mold growth.
09 90 00 PAINTING AND COATING
09 91 00 Painting
Partial or spot painting is not acceptable. If part of a surface requires painting, then the entire surface will
have to be painted or repainted in order to reach a corner or a different material.
Specify no use of interior or exterior paints containing lead.
Specify no use of interior or exterior paints containing intentionally added cadmium.
DIVISION 10 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 89
DIVISION 10 SPECIALTIES
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 10 work include the following:
• Exterior specialties must be designed and installed for the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements
(USAF, 2019b). Such specialties must be designed and detailed to meet all requirements of the High-
Velocity Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC for the applicable sections related
to their material types. Specialties must also be designed for strength, security, and heavy use.
• Applicable manufactured products for exterior use must have a current Miami-Dade NOA that
demonstrates compliance with the wind pressures determined from the wind speed.
• Exterior flood-proofing must be based on the Tyndall AFB DFE memorandum, provided in
Attachment 1 (USAF, 2019a).
10 06 10.13 Exterior Signage Schedule
Provide at all exterior entry doors (egress-only doors excluding) signage communicating Tyndall AFB’s no
smoking policy. Signs must read “No smoking within 50 feet of building” and must be located within
10 feet of each entrance.
10 10 00 INFORMATION SPECIALTIES
10 11 00 Visual Display Units
Provide a 0.021-inch-thick white porcelain enamel-faced panel over the manufacturer’s standard core and
aluminum frame and marker tray in each conference and training room. Board sizes must be based on
room size and be sized to provide writeable surface from 42 inches above floor to 84 inches above floor.
10 14 00 Signage
Materials – General
Each required sign structure and panel type is illustrated on sign-type drawings. The fabricator must
develop construction details and fabrication engineering on the shop drawings. However, final
responsibility for the development and execution of the fabrication detail drawings rests with
the contractor.
Provide materials that have been selected for their surface flatness, smoothness, and freedom from
surface blemishes wherever they will be exposed to view in the finished unit. Exposed-to-view surfaces,
which exhibit pitting, seam marks, roller mark, die marks, “oil-canning,” stains, discoloration, or other
imperfections on the finished units will not be acceptable.
Where metal surfaces or fasteners will be in contact with dissimilar materials, coat the surfaces with
epoxy paint or provide other means of dielectric separation as recommended by manufacturer to prevent
galvanic corrosion.
Aluminum
Aluminum sheet and plate, where specified as single flat panels, must be in the thickness shown on the
Contract Documents and must be of an alloy and temper recommended by the aluminum producer or
finisher for the type of use and finish indicated, and with not less than the strength and durability
properties specified in ASTM B209 for alloy 6061-T6.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 10
90 04 November 2019
Aluminum sheet, where specified for forming and for welding, must be in the thickness and profiles shown
on the Contract Documents and must be of an alloy and temper recommended by the aluminum producer
or finisher for the type of use and finish indicated, with not less than the strength and durability properties
specified in ASTM B209 for alloy 5005-H16.
Aluminum extrusions where specified must be of an alloy and temper recommended by the aluminum
producer or finisher of the type of use and finish indicated, and with not less than the strength and
durability properties specified in ASTM B221 for alloy 6063-T5 unless particular extrusions are specified.
All screws, bolts, and fasteners associated with aluminum must be stainless steel.
Protection of aluminum:
• Isolate aluminum in contact with or fastened to dissimilar metals other than stainless steel, white
bronze, or other metals compatible with aluminum by one of the following:
− Paint dissimilar metal with a suitable primer, followed by two coats of aluminum paint
− Placing an approved caulking compound
− Gasket between aluminum and the dissimilar metal
• Paint aluminum in contact with or built into mortar, concrete, or other masonry materials with a coat of
bituminous paint or other suitable primer
Vinyl Sheet
Use non-reflective vinyl sheet with satin matte finish sheen.
• Total thickness: 0.003 to 0.004 inch
• Adhesive: Permanent pressure sensitive
• Liner: Transparent synthetic
Electrical Signs
General: Furnish and install all lighting, electrical components, fixtures, and lamps ready for use in
accordance with the sign-type drawings, details, and specifications.
The contractor must verify line voltages for locations that require electrical signs.
Quality Control: Installed electrical components and sign installations are to bear the label and
certification of UL and are to comply with National Electrical Code (NEC) as well as applicable Federal,
state, and local codes for installation techniques, fabrication methods and general product safety.
Design of all electrical components is by the fabricator. All transformers and electrical hardware must be
concealed (that is, non-audible and non-visible to pedestrian traffic). The fabricator must ensure all
electrical components are easily accessible for maintenance and servicing. All necessary point-ofconnection
coordination is the responsibility of the fabricator.
The fabricator must provide the Owner’s Authorized Representative and contractor with a list of electrical
requirements for each element no later than 21 days after final Shop Drawing approval.
Visible labels, manufacturer’s or otherwise, code permitting, must not appear on any completed element.
The placement of any required labels must be approved by Owner’s Authorized Representative prior to
application and installation.
Lighting
The fabricator must follow the drawings for visual appearance, but design of internal structure, fixtures
and mounting assemblies is by the fabricator. The fabricator must ensure all lighting components are
easily accessible for maintenance and servicing. Unless otherwise noted, the interior of all illuminated
DIVISION 10 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 91
enclosures must be painted matte white to increase reflectivity. All lighting components must be
constructed in accordance with recognized national standards, and specific manufacturer’s
recommendations.
Plastic Acrylic
Provide translucent white and clear for illuminated signs.
Cast Acrylic Sheet: Provide cast (not extruded or continuous cast) methacrylate monomer plastic, with
the following:
• Minimum flexural strength of 16,000 psi when tested in accordance with ASTM D790, and a minimum
allowable continuous service temperature of 176°F.
• Have the following physical properties:
− Tensile Strength: 9-18,000 psi
− Compressive Strength: 14-17,000 psi
− Specific Gravity: 1.4-1.6
• Temperature Resistance: Signs must remain firm and strong to 200°F without warping, distorting, or
cracking.
• Flame Resistance: Application of a lighted match will not produce melting, flashing, flaring or
distortion. Signs must not ignite at a temperature less than 800°F.
• Cleanability: Unpainted or exposed acrylic sign surfaces to be cleanable with non-abrasive soap
detergents or similar cleaners recommended by manufacturer, without hazing, or otherwise damaging
the acrylic surface.
• Where indicated on drawings, provide inscribed plastic acrylic sheet for luminous refractive material
for light dispersal at edge lit technology.
Adhesives
Adhesives required must be used in accordance with recommendations made by the manufacturer of the
material to be laminated or adhered. No adhesives that will fade, discolor, or delaminate as a result of
light or heat must be used. Adhesives required must be non-staining and not change the color of or
deteriorate materials. Visible joints must be free from air bubbles, dirt, and other defects.
• Silicone: Clear silastic vinyl adhesive. Follow manufacturer recommendations for surface
preparation, material compatibility, strength rating and application.
• Epoxy Adhesive: Two-part catalytic epoxy adhesive. Follow manufacturer recommendations for
surface preparation, material compatibility, strength rating, and application.
Fasteners
Fasteners must be hidden except where noted on Contract Documents. All fasteners must be stainless
steel. Exposed fasteners, when unavoidable, must be tamper-proof, stainless steel and painted to match
adjacent surfaces.
10 14 23.16 Room Identification Panel Signage
Provide 0.125-inch frameless laminated acrylic compliant with ASTM D4802 with raised letters, graphics,
and braille text laminated to the background. Signage size and color must be as selected by the
Government. Signage must be installed with double faced tape or concealed anchors. Assume one sign
for every door/space in each building. Exterior building signage will be addressed elsewhere.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 10
92 04 November 2019
10 20 00 INTERIOR SPECIALTIES
10 21 00 Compartments and Cubicles
10 21 13.19 Plastic Toilet Compartments
Provide floor-supported, overhead-braced toilet partitions and floor-supported wall-mounted urinal
screens. Provide continuous stainless-steel or polymer brackets at walls.
Doors, panels, and pilasters must be constructed of high-density polyethylene (HDPE), not less than
1-inch thick and installed to prevent sightlines into the stalls.
All hardware must be manufacturer’s standard, constructed of stainless steel, and in compliance with
ASTM A743/A743M.
10 22 00 Partitions
Use of rapidly-renewable material is encouraged but should be evaluated when used in wall construction.
Cellulose, mineral fiber, and glass fiber batts can absorb moisture in high humidity areas and promote
microbial growth. In high humidity areas, specify non-absorptive cores and components.
Use modular, moveable, and demountable components (floors, carpeting, partitions, and similar) where
appropriate to reduce material use and for ease of disassembly, deconstruction, and future recycling.
In unfinished, and/or unconditioned spaces and industrial work areas, partitions should be painted
concrete block masonry, concrete, or pre-cast concrete, as applicable.
10 22 39 Folding Panel Partitions
Provide electrically operated acoustical partitions where indicated on the drawings. Provide the
manufacturer’s 10-year material and workmanship warranty for all components of the folding panel
partitions.
All products must comply with ASTM E84 for surface burning characteristics of:
• Flame Spread Index: 25 or less
• Smoke Developed Index: 450 or less
Electrical components, devices, and accessories must be listed and labeled as defined in National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) 70 by a qualified testing agency and marked for intended location and
application.
Additional panel criteria are as follows:
• STC rating must be not less than 54.
• NRC rating must be not less than 60.
• Panels must be constructed of steel framing and gypsum board.
• Panel finish facing must be as selected by the Government from manufacturer’s full range of standard
finishes. At the Government’s direction, provide a portion of the panel finishes as porcelain steel
marker/projection surface and self-healing tackable, vinyl-coated fabric wall covering with Class A
laminated to natural cork tackboard.
• Panel, bottom, and top seals must be manufacturer’s standard in profiles to minimize sound leakage.
DIVISION 10 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 93
• Suspension system must be manufacturer’s standard and mounted with adjustable steel hanger rods
for overhead support. Limit track deflection to 0.10 inch.
• Electric operator and control system must comply with National Electrical Manufacturers Association
(NEMA) ICS1, NEMA ICS 2, and NEMA ICS 6.
• Provide obstruction detection that stops panels and reverses direction.
10 26 00 Wall and Door Protection
All products must comply with ASTM E84 or UL 723 for surface burning characteristics of:
• Flame Spread Index: 25 or less
• Smoke Developed Index: 450 or less
Where stainless steel corner guards are not provided, corner guards must be manufacturer’s standard
surface-mounted assembly consisting of 0.100-inch-thick snap-on resilient plastic cover installed over
continuous retainer with impact-absorbing clips. Mounting hardware must be included. Fabricate with an
angle to match the wall conditions. Color and texture must be as selected by the Government from the
manufacturer’s full range of standard colors.
Non-corrosive materials should be used for all exterior walls and doors. See Section 10 71 19, Flood
Barriers, for building exterior flood protection measures.
10 40 00 SAFETY SPECIALTIES
10 44 13 Fire Protection Cabinets
Provide fire protection cabinets for portable fire extinguishers. Cabinets must be semi-recessed units
constructed of aluminum with a rating equal to the wall in which they are installed. Door must be fully
glazed tempered glass panel with frame, constructed of sheet steel, primed for field painting. Fire
Extinguisher decal must be installed vertically on glass. Provide 10-pound Type ABC fire extinguisher at
each cabinet and hook location.
10 50 00 STORAGE SPECIALTIES
10 51 13 Metal Lockers
Provide welded, cold-rolled, steel metallic coated metal athletic and equipment storage lockers (and
benches).
Provide one-piece doors with manufacturer’s standard reinforcement with louvered or perforated vents at
doors. Provide stainless-steel strike plate with integral pull with steel padlock loop that projects through
locker door. Provide manufacturer’s standard aluminum identification plate with numbers and letters.
Provide units with manufacturer’s continuous base, trim, filler panels boxed ends, and sloped tops as
required for a complete installation.
Finish of lockers must be manufacturer’s baked enamel or powder coat finish as selected by the
Government from the full range of manufacturer’s standard colors.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 10
94 04 November 2019
10 70 00 EXTERIOR SPECIALTIES
Coordinate with Division 32, Exterior Improvements.
Aesthetically organize all mechanical, electrical, and other building components as design elements of the
façade and coordinate with other architectural features. Locate equipment such as gas meters to
minimize visual impact. Integrate all mechanical, electrical, and other building components into the overall
architectural design. Do not expose conduits, cables, and piping on exterior walls. All gas meters, fire
bells, vents, louvres, and electrical/communications boxes must be painted to match the wall surface on
which equipment is mounted or installed directly in front of, allowing equipment to blend in.
10 71 19 Flood Barriers
Flood barriers are a form of dry floodproofing intended to prevent additional flood waters from reaching
sensitive infrastructure or from penetrating the exterior of a building.
10 71 19.13 Operable Flood Barriers for Buildings
Operable dry floodproofing gates can be used to prevent flood waters such as storm surge from entering
a building during severe weather events.
Temporary or permanent flood barriers may be installed to protect buildings located within the floodplain
or that have finished floor elevations located below the established DFE. Flood barriers are best suited for
protection of existing buildings and sensitive or critical infrastructure located within flood zones or areas at
risk of flooding. Flood barriers are not intended to replace appropriate building and infrastructure
minimum design criteria for new construction and major renovation projects. All new capital projects must
follow the minimum design criteria as provided in Division 01.
Operable flood-proofing barriers may include the following, or similar, as approved by the USAF:
• ILC Dover flood barriers
• Flood Risk America flood barriers
• Aqua Fence flood barriers
• Pressray flood gates, or flood barriers
All building flood barriers must for provide for rapid deployment in advance of a flood event. Building flood
barriers must be constructed of non-corrosive materials with stainless steel fasteners. Flexible and ridged
blood barriers are permitted. Flood log-style or similar barriers that are not permanently attached to a
building but are located adjacent to the building opening and/or stored in another location away from
building openings are not allowed for building opening protection.
Dry floodproofing measures are not permitted for use on buildings below the base flood elevation in
Coastal High Hazard Areas, Coastal A Zones, as defined by the current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate
Map panel.
If a building is designed for occupation during flood conditions, at least one exit door or emergency
escape/rescue opening must be provided above the elevation specified for dry floodproofing.
Elevated Buildings with Enclosed Lower Floor
Two methods are specified to meet the standards for flood openings in walls of enclosures below
elevated buildings to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater:
1) Nonengineered openings that do not require certification must provide a minimum of 1 square inch
opening in the enclosed space wall per square foot of enclosed area
2) Engineered openings that must be certified by a registered design professional
DIVISION 10 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 95
The performance of engineered openings must account for the presence of louvers, blades, screens,
grilles, faceplates, or other covers and devices and must ensure that the difference between the exterior
and interior floodwater levels cannot exceed 1 foot. Installation of all flood openings must be in at least
two walls and must be no more than 1 foot above the higher of the interior grade or floor and the finished
exterior grade immediately under each opening.
All breakaway walls in all flood hazard areas must have flood openings. Walls designed to break away
must not produce debris that is capable of damaging structures.
10 71 19.16 Removable Flood Barriers for Exterior Equipment
Temporary flood barriers can also be used to protect equipment such as electrical and communications
that are sensitive to flood exposure. These flood barriers may be flexible or rigid, and may be stored away
from the equipment they are designed to protect; however, they must be rapidly deployable and stored
near the site of their intended use. Barrier types must be manufactured of non-corrosive materials with
stainless-steel fasteners.
Removable flood barriers may include the following, or similar, as approved by the USAF:
• Flood Panel removable flood barriers (stop log style)
• ILC Dover flood barriers
• Aqua Fence flood barriers
• Pressray flood gates, or flood barriers
10 71 30 Exterior Window Shutters
The shutter assembly must be seamlessly integrated with the building architecture and should not appear
as an add-on. The use of window shutters is intended only for retrofit of existing buildings. All new
buildings are anticipated to be constructed with impact-resistant windows and doors.
Hurricane shutters must carry Miami-Dade NOA approvals. Removable shutters are not allowed, as
components requiring storage, are often misplaced, or lost, and require more installation time.
Vertical Coiling (Roll-Up) Hurricane Shutters
Assembly should be recessed into the wall opening flush with wall plane. If roll-up housing protrudes past
the wall plane, the top must be sloped to discourage bird nesting and to prevent corrosion from standing
rain water. All coiling shutters must have interior manual operations or electronic operation with manual
back-up operation.
Casement (Side-Hinged) Hurricane Shutters
Side-hinged colonial casement-type shutters must be hardened with a 1/4-inch (7 mm)-thick minimum
solid polycarbonate panel on the interior side attached with Type 316 stainless-steel hardware and
fasteners. Type 316 stainless-steel securing brackets must be an integral part of the shutters
(nonremovable) and mechanically locked to secure shutters in closed position.
Sun-Control Devices
Sun-control devices must be integrated on the building exteriors to shield direct sunlight on glazing and to
reduce cooling load and glare while maximizing daylight to interior spaces. These devices must be
integrated into the building construction, so they do not appear as an afterthought addition, do not collect
dirt, and allow for easy window cleaning. Sun-control devices may include overhangs, canopies, louvers,
solar screens, and trellises. Light shelves installed on the exterior (and or interior) of windows are another
type of shading device that increase light penetration into the building interior. Elements typically include
horizontal, vertical, cantilevered, and suspended, supports and surfaces. The material for exterior sun
control devices may be of concrete or aluminum.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 10
96 04 November 2019
If window blinds are used, they must not be of reflective metal.
10 73 43 Transportation Stop Shelters
Bus Shelters
• Manufacturer: Brasco International, 32400 Industrial
Drive, Madison Heights, MI 48071, (800) 893-0393,
info@brasco.com
• Model: Interlude
• Color: Natural aluminum with perforated metal wall back
and an aluminum roof
• Finish: Clear anodized
• Other: 5 feet deep by 8 feet long. Provide a concrete
slab and engineered mounting. The shelter must be designed to meet hurricane wind loads
10 75 16 Ground-Set Flagpoles
Obtain flagpoles as a complete unit, including fittings, accessories, bases,
anchorage devices, and lighting grounding from a single manufacturer.
Manufacturer must provide compete design, including anchorages and
supports that withstand the High-Velocity Hurricane Wind loads designated for
the area.
Flagpoles must be cone or entasis-tapered (match existing on the Installation)
fabricated from seamless extruded tubing. Each flagpole must be provided
with a finial as selected by the Government and internal halyard, cam, and
cleat system.
Quantity of poles, exposed height and finish/color must be as directed from the
Government at each location.
Provide manufacturer’s standard foundation tube and sleeve for installation.
Flagpoles
• Manufacturer: Eder Flag Manufacturing Company, Inc., 1000 W. Rawson
Avenue, P.O. Box 397, Oak Creek, WI 53154-0397, (414) 764-3522 or
(800) 558-6044
• Model: ECH50 IH, Internal Halyard
• Color: Natural aluminum
• Finish: Satin
• Other: 30-foot height; hurricane wind rated.
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 97
DIVISION 11 EQUIPMENT
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience objectives and guidelines specific
to Division 11 work include improving performance of the following:
• Energy efficiency
• Water use efficiency
• Enhanced indoor environmental quality (air, light, sound, thermal comfort)
• Wind and flood resilience
All flood-sensitive equipment, including pumps, controls, communications, and electrical equipment, must
be located no lower than the adopted DFE for Tyndall AFB, or be flood-proofed to an elevation of 1 foot
above the DFE. Equipment must not be located within depressional areas and must be elevated a
minimum of 1 foot above finished grade. In place of elevating, equipment and furnishings may be
constructed of water and corrosion resilient materials to avoid damage during flood inundation.
11 10 00 VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN EQUIPMENT
Coordinate with Division 25, Integrated Automation.
11 13 19 Stationary Loading Dock Equipment
Loading dock equipment must consist of the following:
• Recessed hinged-lip loading dock levelers rated for 45,000 pounds minimum. Leveler must be
72 inches wide, permanently installed in a concrete pit, and be capable of accommodating 12-inch
vertical travel higher or lower than the dock platform. Electrical components, devices, and
accessories must be listed and labeled as defined in the NFPA 70 by a qualified testing agency and
marked for intended location and application.
• Truck restraints must be designed to engage a truck’s rear impact guard and hold the truck at the
loading dock. Rated capacity must be 32,000 pounds with a vertical range of 8 inches and horizontal
range of 0 to 12 inches in front of the dock bumpers.
• Include laminated bumper tread and a steel-frame-and-anchorage system to prevent damage to the
dock and trucks during loading and unloading procedures.
11 20 00 COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT
11 30 13 Residential Appliances
Appliances will be Government Furnished and Contractor Installed. This information in this section is for
contractor coordination and to provide proper utility connections at all appliances.
All appliances will be powered by electricity and must be listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70 by a
qualified testing agency and marked for intended location and application. All appliances must be
provided with manufacturer’s 5-year standard material and workmanship warranty. Appliances must also
meet requirements set forth in UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements,
to be ENERGY STAR and/or WaterSense labeled and meet efficiency requirements. Coordinate with
Division 22, Plumbing, for water-efficiency standards.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
98 04 November 2019
11 52 13 Projection Screens
Provide manufacturer’s standard electrically operated front projection screens, consisting of case, screen,
motor, controls, mounting accessories, and other components necessary for a complete installation.
Electrical components, devices, and accessories must be listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70 by a
qualified testing agency and marked for the intended location and application.
Case must be constructed from the manufacturer’s standard materials and recess-mounted in a ceiling
trough with concealed mounting hardware.
Provide two control switches for each screen. Switches must be key-operated three-position switches with
one installed on the wall adjacent to screen and the other switch at the back of the room.
Screens must be tab tensioned with viewing surface sized in accordance with the room. Provide
additional drop height material, if required due to room construction/ceiling height.
11 53 00 Laboratory Equipment
• Fume Extractor Arm
− Overall Dimensions: 30 inches deep by 72 inches wide by 40 inches high
− Engineering Data: Exhaust – 75 cfm
− Features: Fan and filter
− Construction: Double anodized aluminum
• Glassware Washer/Dryer
− Description:
 Chamber load capacity: 26 inches by 25.5 inches by 26 inches
 Installation: Fully recessed in one wall
 Heat source: Electric heat unit
 Door Configuration: Single; vertical sliding; power operated
− Engineering Data:
 Electricity: 480 Volt (V), 60-hertz (Hz), 3-phase, 3 wire, 30 ampere (A), single point hardwired
connection
 Hot Water: 1/2-inch National Pipe Thread (NPT); 15-50 pounds per square inch gauge (psig)
dynamic; 110°F (43 degrees Celsius [°C])
 Maximum Flow Rate: 11.2 gallons per minute (gpm)
 Cold Water: 1/2-inch NPT; 30-50 psig dynamic; 60°F (16°C)
 Maximum Flow Rate: 15.2 gpm
 Pure Water: 5/8-inch outside diameter (OD); 5-50 psig dynamic
 Minimum specific resistivity of 1.0 megohm/centimeter recommended
 Maximum Flow Rate: 13.3 gpm
 Air: 1/8-inch NPT; 50-125 psig
 Maximum Flow Rate: 1 standard cubic feet per minute (scfm)
 Vent: 3-inch OD; 30 scfm max
 Drain: 2-inch NPT
 Maximum Flow Rate: 90 gpm
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 99
− Features and Accessories:
 Electric heated pure water rinse
 Drain discharge cool down and cold water pre-wash
 Drying system
 Barrier flange kit for recessing in modular wall system
 Universal shelving system with loading car
 Bottom rotary spray header with general purpose basket and cover
− Service
 Replacement parts must be available direct to Tyndall AFB from local purchase sources, or
through manufacturers independent authorized service agencies
 A full set of printed and bound manuals explaining machine operation and operator controls
must be provided; a complete list of component parts including original part numbers, and the
nearest local distributor where the parts can be purchased must be included
 Standard service response must be within 24 hours
• Glassware Washer/Dryer
− Description:
 Chamber load capacity: 39 inches by 25.5 inches by 25 inches
 Installation: Fully recessed in one wall
 Heat source: Electric heat unit
 Door configuration: single; vertical sliding; power operated
− Engineering Data:
 Electricity: 480V, 60 Hz, 3-phase, 3-wire, 30A, single-point hardwired connection
 Hot Water: 1/2-inch NPT; 15-50 psig dynamic; 110°F (43°C)
 Maximum Flow Rate: 11.2 gpm
 Cold Water: 1/2-inch NPT; 30-50 psig dynamic; 60°F (16°C)
 Maximum Flow Rate: 15.2 gpm
 Pure Water: 5/8-inch OD; 5-50 psig dynamic
 Minimum specific resistivity of 1.0 megohm/centimeter recommended
 Maximum Flow Rate: 13.3 gpm
 Air: 1/8-inch NPT; 50-125 psig
 Maximum Flow Rate: 1 scfm
 Vent: 3-inch OD; 75 scfm maximum
 Drain: 2-inch NPT
 Maximum Flow Rate: 90 gpm
− Features and Accessories:
 Electric heated pure water rinse
 Drain discharge cool down and cold water pre-wash
 Drying system
 Barrier flange kit for recessing in modular wall system
 Universal shelving system with loading cart
 Bottom rotary spray header with general purpose basket and cover
− Service
 Replacement parts must be available direct to the Owner from local purchase sources, or
through manufacturers independent authorized service agencies
 A full set of printed and bound manuals explaining machine operation and operator controls
must be provided; A complete list of component parts including original part numbers, and the
nearest local distributor where the parts can be purchased must be included
 Standard service response must be within 24 hours
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
100 04 November 2019
• Pass-Through Cabinet
− Features:
 Constructed of Type 304 stainless steel, minimum 12-gauge
 Stainless-steel wall-embed flange with welded studs, wall rough in opening
 Double interlocks (with a programmable logic controller [PLC]) to prevent both doors from
being opened at the same time; provide with molded ground plug with a 10-foot cord
 Doors constructed of Type 304 stainless steel; 1/4-inch thick
 Doors provided with 3/8-inch thick clear polycarbonate sealed with gasket and stainless-steel
frame
 Capability to perform pressure test
 Mounting flange with bolt hole pattern to match with embed flange welded studs
 Aluminum exterior weather cover with door and lock
− Engineering Data:
 Electrical: 120V, 5-amp, single-phase hardwired connection
• Marble Balance Table
− 24 inches wide by 36 inches deep by 30 inches high
− Table will be white/brown marble with reinforced slab marble legs
− All edges must be rounded
• Marker Board
− Construction
 Porcelain surface on 24-gauge steel, designed for marker board application, in color as
selected by the Architect
 Core must be 3/8-inch particle board
 Backer sheet must be 0.015-inch aluminum
 Trim must be extruded aluminum, designed for concealed fastenings, clear anodized finish
with chalk tray
 Where seams must be used, provide seaming diagram for Architect's acceptance
− Sizes:
 Type 1: 4 feet wide by 3 feet high
 Type 2: 6 feet wide by 3 feet high
• Heavy-Duty Storage Shelving
− Provide heavy duty shelving capable of holding 2,000 to 2,500 pounds total capacity
• Cylinder Restraint
− Description: Wall-mounted cylinder restraint with cylinder strap
• Laboratory Paper Towel Dispenser
− Recessed-mounted paper towel dispenser
• Free Standing Shelving
− Stainless steel in sizes as listed below:
 Type 1: 18 inches deep by 84 inches high and 4 feet long with four adjustable shelves
 Type 2: 24 inches deep by 84 inches high and 4 feet long with four adjustable shelves
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 101
• Flammable Storage Cabinets
− Construction:
 Constructed of 18-gauge steel, sides, top, bottom, and doors are double-walled with a 1-1/2-
inch air space between walls
 Both vents, with 2-inch threaded fittings, must have fire baffle and cap
• Corrosive Storage Cabinets
− Construction:
 Constructed of 18-gauge steel, sides, top, bottom, and doors are double-walled with a 1-1/2-
inch air space between walls
 Both vents, with 2-inch threaded fittings, have fire baffle and cap
 Finish with corrosive-resistant epoxy powder coated finish on all internal and external
surfaces
 Provide polyethylene trays to fit over shelves and in the cabinet bottom, for containing small
spills
11 53 13 Laboratory Fume Hoods
References
• ANSI
• ANSI/ASHRAE 110-1999, Standard for testing performance of Fume Hoods
• NFPA 45, Fire Protection for Laboratories Using Chemicals
• ANSI/ASHRAE III, Testing and Balancing
• ANSI/American Industrial Hygiene Association Z9.5, Laboratory Ventilation Standard
Performance Standards
• General Performance: Design fume hoods so that, when connected to exhaust system that provides
exhaust volume indicated on the drawings under normal laboratory conditions, fume hoods will
operate in a safe, consistent, and efficient manner, within acceptable tolerances for face velocities
specified. Dead air pockets and reverse air currents will not be permitted along surface of hood
interiors. Negative variations of face velocity must not exceed 20% of the average face velocity.
• Static Pressure Loss: Design fume hoods to minimize static pressure loss. Static pressure loss
through the variable air volume (VAV) restricted bypass fume hoods must be no more than 0.20 inch
of water gauge when hood operates at the containment standards listed in this specification.
• Containment per ASHRAE 110: Provide fume hoods that have a face velocity of 100 feet per minute
(fpm) (0.51 meter per second) and a release rate of 4.0 liter per minute (Lpm) when tested in
accordance with ASHRAE 110:
− VAV bypass low-velocity fume hood(s) at a face velocity of 84 fpm with sash at 18 inches open
and 55 fpm with sash at 28 inches open
− As-Manufactured Rating: AM 0.05 (0.05 ppm]
− As-Installed Rating: AI 0.10 (0.10 ppm)
Quality Assurance
• Source Quality Control: Manufacturer is required to demonstrate hood performance prior to
shipment to prove compliance with contract requirements. Provide test hoods, testing facility,
necessary instrumentation, apparatus, and equipment at no cost to Contracting Officer. Test hoods to
verify performance requirements in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 110P. Acceptable control
level of fume hood performance "as manufactured" is required to be less than 0.10 ppm at ejector
flow rate of 4 Lpm. The A/E reserves right to make changes in design where necessary to comply
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
102 04 November 2019
with specified standards. Incorporate such changes at no addition to the Contract Sum. Hood must be
tested with a face velocity of 100 fpm full open vertically.
• Source Limitations: Obtain through the same source and from the same manufacturer as laboratory
casework specified in Section 123553 “Laboratory Casework."
Coordination
It must be the responsibility of the contractor to coordinate with all trades to ensure continuity and
cooperation. Fume hoods, as installed, are considered to be finished work and must be protected from
damage by all trades.
• Painting and Other Finishing Trades: At no time must the installed work surface be used by
tradesmen as a workbench, scaffolding, and similar. It is the responsibility of the contractor to perform
minor wall touch-up around laboratory equipment and to caulk between fume hood and other
surfaces as indicated on drawings. The contractor must protect installed fume hoods from debris,
paint, and damage in the course of the construction sequence.
• Rough-In: Contractor must install waste lines and traps as specified in Division 22, Plumbing. Fume
hood manufacturer must provide sinks in fume hoods, complete with a tailpiece. Contractor must
furnish and install all piping downstream from the tailpiece under the requirements of Division 22,
Plumbing.
• Mechanical Service Fittings and Fixtures: Fume hood manufacturer must provide (supply, install,
and pre-plumb) mechanical service fittings and fixtures for fume hoods as denoted in Section 12 35
55, Laboratory Sinks and Fixtures. Contractor must provide pre-plumbed piping to a point above or
below (as shown on drawings) for connection to building utilities. Contractor must install service
fixtures and connect to piped utilities as specified in Division 22, Plumbing. Install and connect all
plumbing fixtures as described in Division 22, Plumbing. Factory test the piping.
Fume hood manufacturer to provide a round vent exhaust collar connection. Connection from the
fume hood exhaust collar to building exhaust system is described in Division 23, Heating, Ventilation,
and Air Conditioning. Test and balance of HVAC system includes fume hoods and is specified in
Division 23, Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning.
• Electrical: Provide a light fixture (shipped loose without lamp) for each fume hood. Furnish fume
hoods that are pre-wired and UL labeled, excluding the alarm. All outlets on fume hoods must be
ground-fault interrupter (GFI)-type, NEMA 5-20 configuration. Contractor to make final connection of
fume hood electrical work, including alarm, under Division 26, Electrical.
• Mechanical and Electrical Trades: Where access is required through fume hoods, the service
trades are responsible for removing access panels, drawers, or other components where they occur,
making their connections, and properly replacing such access panels, drawers, or other components
at their own expense.
Performance Requirements
• Low Constant-Volume Dynamic Barrier Bypass Fume Hood at Medium Setting
• Overall Dimensions:
− As required by program
− All models require 103-inch vertical clearance for fully opened sash
• Engineering Data:
− Plumbing: Pre-piped for laboratory services
− Electrical: Two T-5 LED light fixture with light switch and two 120V/20A GFI receptacles (one
each side).
− Mechanical: Exhaust collars as required
− Remote control utility service fixtures
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 103
− Bypass must be sufficient in size to allow 20% flow with sash closed
• Options:
− Epoxy worktop and liner
− Pre-wired for UL listing
− Provide sash stop
Fabrication
• Steel: High quality, cold-rolled, mild steel meeting requirements of ASTM A366; gauges should be
U.S. Standard.
• Stainless Steel: Type 304; gauges should be U.S. Standard.
• Bypass Grilles: Low-resistant-type, 18-gauge steel, upward directional louvers.
• Tempered safety glass at sash with manufacturer’s recommended sash cables, guides, and pulley
assembly.
• Sash Pull: Full width corrosion-resistant plastic, stainless steel, or steel with chemical-resistant
powder coating.
• Gaskets: 70 durometer PVC for interior access panels; gasket interior access panels eliminate air
leakage and to retain liquids inside hood.
• Fastenings: Exterior structural member attachments must use zinc-plated sheet metal screws.
− Interior fastening devices must be concealed; exposed screws are not acceptable.
− Exterior panel member fastening devices must be corrosion-resistant, non-metallic material;
exposed screws are not acceptable.
• Instruction Plate: Corrosion-resistant or plastic plate attached to the fume hood exterior with
condensed information covering recommended locations for apparatus and accessories baffle
settings and use of sash.
• Metal Finish:
− Preparation: Spray clean metal with a heated cleaner/phosphate solution, pretreat with iron
phosphate spray, water rinse, and neutral final seal; immediately dry in heated ovens, gradually
cooled, prior to application of finish.
− Application: Electrostatically apply powder coat of selected color and bake in controlled high
temperature oven to assure a smooth, hard stain finish. Surfaces must have a chemical-resistant,
high grade laboratory furniture quality finish of the following thicknesses:
 Exterior and interior surfaces exposed to view: 1.5 mil average and 1.2 mil minimum.
 Backs of cabinets and other surfaces not exposed to view: 1.0 mil average.
• Superstructure: Rigid, self-supporting assembly of double wall construction, maximum 4-7/8-inch
thick:
− Walls must consist of a sheet steel outer shell and a corrosion-resistant inner liner, and house
and conceal steel framing members, attaching brackets and remote operating service fixture
mechanisms and services. Panels must be attached to a full frame construction, minimum
14-gauge galvanized members. Panels and brackets attached to eliminate screw heads and
metallic bracketry from hood interior.
− Access to fixture valves concealed in the wall must be provided by exterior removable access
panels, gasketed access panels on the inside liner walls, or through removable front posts.
• Exhaust Outlet: Circular with ends radiused, shaped, and flanged, 18-gauge steel finish with
Chameleon powder coating.
• Access Opening Perimeter: Air foil or streamlined shape with all right angle corners radiused or
angled. Bottom horizontal foil must provide nominal 1-inch bypass when sash is in the closed
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
104 04 November 2019
position. Bottom foil must be removable without use of special tools. Bottom foil must provide access
areas for electrical cords. Bottom foil; must be steel with black powder coating to increase acid and
abrasion resistance.
• Vertical Rising Fume Hood Sash: Full view type with clear, unobstructed, side to side view of fume
hood interior and service fixture connections.
− Bottom Sash Rail: 2-inch maximum, 18-gauge steel with powder coating finish. Provide integral
formed, flush pull the full width of bottom rail.
− Set safety glass into rails in deep form, extruded polyvinyl chloride glazing channels.
− Counter Balance System: Single weight, pulley, cable, and counter balance system which
prevents sash tilting and permits one finger operation at any point along full width pull. Maximum
7 pounds pull required to raise or lower sash throughout its full length of travel. Design system to
hold sash at any position without creep and to prevent sash drop in the event of cable failure.
− Open and close sash against rubber bumper stops.
• Fume Hood Liner: Interior liner panels must be 1/4-inch-thick epoxy resin sheets of a neutral color.
Interior liner panels must be fastened using stainless-steel screws with plastic-covered heads.
• Baffles: Baffles providing controlled air vectors into and through the fume hood must be fabricated of
the same material as the liner. Provide exhaust slots full height on vertical sides of the baffle with
upper and lower slots adjustable. Provide fixed, permanently open horizontal slot 17 inches above the
work surface. Minimum height of 19 inches for interior work space is acceptable at the extreme upper
portion of the fume hood to provide maximum interior work area. All baffle supports/brackets must be
non-metallic.
• Baffle Adjustment: The upper and lower horizontal slots must be provided with adjustable baffles
that allow the slots to be opened or closed.
• Service Fixtures and Fittings:
− Provide piping for all service fixtures from valve to outlet. Copper for water, air, and vacuum and
black iron for gas services.
− Fixture fittings must incorporate quick connect compression fittings on the valve body (for the
media inlet and media outlet) as well as the fume hood outlet nozzle. With this system, no
soldering or brazing must be required to complete mechanical connections.
− Fixtures exposed to fume hood interior. Brass with chemical-resistant polyester powder lacquer
color coded to the media.
− Fixtures must be provided with easy-to-mount attachment device for secure mounting in deck or
wall-mounted applications. System must be installed with simple hand tools.
− Fittings must be constructed to operate with the following maximum working pressure without
leak or failure:
 Water Fittings 145 psi
 Non-Burning Gas 145 psi
 Burning Gases 100 psi
 Special Water Fittings 145 psi
 Oxygen Fittings 145 psi
− All outlets must have detachable serrated nozzles.
− All valves must be front loaded for ease of access and maintenance at point of use.
• Hood Light Fixture: Two lamp, rapid start, UL-listed LED light fixture with sound rated ballast
installed on exterior of roof. Provide safety glass panel cemented and sealed to the hood roof.
− Interior of Fixture: White, high reflecting plastic enamel
− Size of Fixture: Largest possible up to 48 inches for hoods with superstructures up to 6 feet.
Provide two 36-inch fixtures for hoods with 8-foot superstructures
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 105
− Include lamps with fixtures
− Illumination: 50 foot-candles
• Electrical Services:
− Three-wire grounding-type receptacles rated at 120 volts alternating current (VAC) at 20 amps
− Flush plates must be black, acid-resistant thermo-plastic
− Molded resin work surfaces for hoods with Resisto-Roc or polyresin liners
• Safety Monitor/Alarm System:
− All fume hood monitors, sensors, and similar must be furnished by the Division 23, Heating,
Ventilation, and Air Conditioning, contractor. Fume hood monitor, reel-type sash sensors and
their stainless-steel cables must be factory-mounted by the fume hood manufacturer, under the
initial supervision of the laboratory air flow controls manufacturer. Sash interface boxes with
interface cards must be mounted in an accessible location. The Division 23, Heating, Ventilation,
and Air Conditioning, contractor must field install the interface boxes on the fume hood under
initial supervision of the laboratory air flow control devices supplier.
• Sinks: Refer to Section 12 35 55, Laboratory Sinks and Fixtures:
− Cup Sinks: Epoxy resin cup sink and faucet similar in material to laboratory faucets; right mount
11 53 19 Laboratory Sterilizers
References
• American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Code, Section VIII, Division I for Unfired Pressure
Vessels
• ASME Code, Section IX for Boiler and Pressure Vessels
• AWS, American Welding Society
• ASTM A240, Specification for Stainless Steel
• ASTM B88, Specification for Seamless, Copper Tubing
• ASTM B43 or B135, Specification for Seamless Red Brass Tubing
• AAMI ST46, Steam Sterilization and Sterility Assurance
• UL Standard 544
Performance Standards
• The autoclaves must be capable of passing biological challenge tests as described in AAMI ST46,
Steam Sterilization and Sterility Assurance.
• The autoclaves must be capable of daily operations described in the design standards with no
regularly scheduled maintenance for a period of 1 year.
• Exposed surfaces of the autoclaves must be resistant to paraformaldehyde gas decontamination.
General
• Provide reinforcing and anchorage for built-in products.
• Insulate between dissimilar metals, and metal and concrete or masonry to prevent electrolysis.
• Equipment must include all electrical components, UL-approved, required by the Engineer, and to
protect the equipment from damage during operation.
• Equipment must include components, connections, devices, and controls required for full and safe
operation.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
106 04 November 2019
• Location and quantity of equipment is indicated on the drawings.
• Autoclaves listed below are the manufacturer’s standard catalog products that may be modified with
standard options to meet additional specified standards.
Fabrication
• Fit joints and junctions between components tightly, in true planes, and to prevent entry of water to
collect in component voids. Cap the open ends of sections exposed to view.
• Fabricate work with materials and component sizes, metal gauges, reinforcing anchors, and
fastenings of adequate strength to ensure that it will remain free of warping, buckling, opening of
joints and seams, and distortion within limits of intended and specified use. Conceal and weld
connection wherever possible.
• Cleanly and smoothly finish exposed edges of materials including holes and cutouts.
• Provide reinforcing and attached anchorage for built-in products.
• Provide holes and connections for work installed under other specification sections.
• Equipment and Standard Options:
− House steam is not provided for in this project. Provide standalone or integral steam generators
for all units as specific.
− Solenoid valves, manual valves, steam pressure regulators, thermostatic steam traps, floor drain,
piping, piping, and electrical connection required for connections to building utility services.
− Steam ejector for all chamber evacuation.
− Chamber high water and temperature alarm.
− ASME Section VIII Division I Safety Valve.
− Drain temperature controlled effluent to less than 140°F.
− Insulated chamber jacket.
− Control lock-out switch: Limit switch on chamber door to prevent cycle from starting unless door
seal is tight against the door.
− Power activated doors, where scheduled: Electrical motor fused and equipped with overload
protection, automatic stop when encountering obstructions and operable in manual mode in case
of power failure or maintenance inspection.
• Chamber Construction: Provide manufacturer’s standard construction for type and size of autoclave
indicated.
• Chamber Door Construction and Operations: Provide manufacturers standard door for type and
size of autoclave scheduled.
• Control System:
− Provide manufacturer’s standard control system, display, and interface for type and size of
autoclave scheduled.
− Program with four factory default cycles. Provide adjustable cycle values and operating features.
Control system must have capability to allow operator to adjust sterilization temperature setting to
285°F with extended time exposure.
− Provide control panel monitor and control all phases of each sterilizing cycle. Remotely mount
control panel as indicated on drawings on end that opens to discharge loads with concealed
conduit. Provide RS-232 interface port for remote monitoring. Provide operating controls on both
sides of double door autoclaves.
− Printer must be provided to record all cycle data. Provide five rolls of printer paper with each
printer. Provide printers on both sides of double door autoclaves.
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 107
− Internal battery system to retain cycle information in memory and uninterrupted power supply
(UPS) to complete active cycle in case of emergency or power failure including valve actuation,
but not to include 3-phase power standards (that is, vacuum pump).
− Key operated manual control operation in cases of emergency power failure or maintenance
inspections, allows operation of cycle parameters.
− Resistance temperature detectors must be provided in chamber drain line and autoclave jacket.
• Autoclave Cycles:
− Gravity Cycle: For the sterilization of heat and moisture-stable goods at 112 to 285°F, and
decontamination of bagged laboratory wastes. Gravity cycle uses the gravity air-displacement
principle.
− Liquid Cycle: For the sterilization of liquids and media in vented borosilicate glass or metal
containers at 212 to 254°F. Liquid cycles use the optimal solution cooling feature, during exhaust
(cooling) phase, to control the exhaust rate.
− Automatic Steam Shutoff to Jacket: For isothermal and liquid cycles to allow operation of cycles
at lower temperatures and more efficient load cooling.
− Prevacuum Cycle: For the efficient sterilization of porous heat and moisture stabile goods at
212 to 285°F. Provide unit equipped to run leak test and daily air removal test cycles.
− Decontamination Cycle: For processing contaminated laboratory waste. After normal cycle all
condensate or other liquid effluent produced during the processing cycle will be automatically
decontaminated prior to discharge to the floor drain.
• Cross Contamination Prevention (Double Door Autoclaves):
− Wall Seal Type 1 – No Seal Required
− Wall Seal Type 2 – Vermin Seal/Air Differential Seal
 Airtight seal consisting of stainless-steel closure panels sealed to wall
 Provide door interlock
− Wall Seal Type 3 – Cross Contamination Seal/Biological Seal
 Airtight Cross Contamination seal system consisting of a mild steel frame (angle or channel)
fully welded to the adjacent containment wall, a containment sealing flange of 1/4-inch-thick
steel welded to the autoclave body, high temp epoxy coated, with a flexible air tight seal
gasket. Gasket material must be heat-resistant, flexible and air-tight. Provide threaded studs,
hex nuts and clamping bars, (high temp epoxy coated) to attach the gasket and complete the
seal between the wall frame and the containment sealing flange.
 Provide door interlock.
 Used in areas of pass-through autoclaves from a BSL-3 rated area.
• Door Interlock: Provide a door interlock system to prevent inadvertent exposure of contaminated air
or products to non-contaminated areas.
− Program doors to prevent both doors from being opened simultaneously. Program autoclaves to
keep non-contaminated end door from opening until after sterilization cycle has been properly
completed after contaminated end odor has been opened. Provide supervisor controlled bypass
capability for maintenance purposes.
− Provide capability of manual door operation in the event of a power failure.
• Discharge and Environmental Protection:
− Discharge Type 1: Standard discharge
 Discharge chamber and jacket effluent to open floor sink after cooling.
 No additional environmental protection.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
108 04 November 2019
− Discharge Type 2: Containment discharge
 Discharge chamber and jacket effluent to open floor sink after cooling and effluent
decontamination cycle.
 Provide high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA)-equivalent filtration on all planned or accidental
discharges of air form chamber prior to completion of sterilization cycle. Filters must be
replaceable cartridge-type mounted on the exterior of the chamber.
− Discharge Type 3: Liquid effluent decontamination system discharge
 Discharge jacket effluent to sealed sink drain.
 Hard connect chamber discharge to drain serving liquid effluent decontamination (biowaste)
system. Provide a sealed, welded, stainless-steel sump box, vented to the outside with
replaceable HEPA filter. Provide manual ball valve to seal drain during filter replacement.
Design vented sump box to relieve backpressure and allow proper autoclave operation.
Autoclave piping must be welded (no threaded connections) and effluent cooling is via a
double-tubed sheet heat exchanger (welded stainless steel) to ensure cooling water is not
contaminated by sterilizer effluent. Discharge non-contaminated cooling water to a standard
sanitary drain.
 Provide HEPA-equivalent filtration on all planned or accidental discharges of air from
chamber prior to completion of sterilization cycle. Filters must be replaceable cartridge-type
mounted on the exterior of the chamber.
• Accessories:
− Loading Car: Welded, stainless-steel frame with modular shelves. Fixed-bottom shelf and
adjustable top shelves. Stainless-steel load-retaining side gates and bearing-mounted wheels.
Provide as specified for each unit type.
− Transfer Carriage: Welded corrosion-resistant tubular steel frame, with height-adjustable loading
car tracks on top, stainless-steel push-bar handle, four casters (two fixed and two swivel), and
shelving component storage system. Provide as specified for each unit type.
− Pure Steam to Chamber Piping: In autoclave units requiring clean steam, separate steam-tochamber
piping including valves, fittings, and similar must provide steam to the autoclave
chamber and must be constructed of 300 series stainless steel. The piping must be compression
type fittings and tubing. Tube fittings must interface to the chamber through threaded vessel
penetration. The chamber safety valve must have Type 316 stainless-steel welded parts.
− Integral Stainless-steel Steam Generator: The autoclave must be equipped with a fully
automatically controlled 30 kilowatt (kW) integral electric steam generator (fed with house
deionized [DI] water system), integral to the piping system and capable of providing adequate
pure steam for the chamber and load. All parts of the generator in contact with feedwater and
pure steam must be made of Type 316 stainless steel. Pure steam must be produced efficiently
by using the house purified water supply. The output steam volume and pressure must be
automatically regulated according to demand. Condensate from the pure steam generator must
be connected to the building’s condensate return.
• Autoclaves:
− Small Double Door Steam Autoclave:
 Cycles: Pre-vacuum, Gravity, Decontamination, Liquid Air-Cooled
 Chamber Size: 20 inches by 20 inches by 38 inches
 Recessed through one wall with Modular Wall System on “Clean” side with hinged access
panels
 Power Door Operation
 Engineering Standards
o Sterilizer Feedwater: 1.0-inch NPT, 30 to 50 psig, house DI water
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 109
o Water Consumption Cold: 140 gallons per cycle, 15 gpm (peak), 10 gpm (idle)
o Water Consumption Hot: 4 gallons per cycle, 1 gpm (peak), 1 gpm (idle)
o Water Size: 1-inch NPT
o Floor Drain: 1-1/2-inch overflow drain tube (ODT), capacity must handle peak water
consumption and be provided within confines of sterilizer
o Electrical Controls: Hardwired, 120V, 60 Hz, 1-phase, 9.5 amps
o Compressed Air: For decontamination and liquid cooled cycles
o Operating Weight: 1,726 pounds
o Heat Loss at 70°F: 2,950 British thermal units per hour (Btu/hr) between walls,
3300 Btu/hr at each end
 Options:
o 30 kW Integral Stainless-Steel Steam Generator
 Feedwater: 1/2-inch NPT 50 to 80 psig dynamic, 97-100% vapor quality
 Generator Heater Terminal Box: Hardwired, 480V, 3-phase
 Capacity of Generator Heaters: 30 kW at 240V and 22.5 kW at 208V
 Controls: hardwired, 120V, 60 Hz, 1-phase, 9.5 amps
 Drain: 1/2-inch ODT
o Wall Seal Type: 3: Cross contamination seal on “containment” side
o Discharge Type: 2: Containment discharge
o Door interlock with air-differential seal
 Accessories:
o Two loading cars
o One transfer carriage
− Medium Double Door Steam Autoclave:
 Cycles: Pre-vacuum, Gravity, Decontamination, Liquid Air-Cooled
 Chamber Size: 26 inches by 38 inches by 60 inches
 Recessed through one wall (on BSL-3 corridor side) and modular wall system on “clean” side
with hinged access panels
 Manual Door Operation
 Engineering Standards:
o Water Pressure: 20 to 50 psig
o Water Consumption: 130 gallons per hour
o Water Peak Flow: 15 gpm
o Water Size: 1-inch NPT
o Floor Drain: 2-inch ODT drain terminal, capacity must handle peak water consumption
and be provided within confines of sterilizer
o Electric Controls: hardwired, 120V 1-phase, 60 Hz, hardwired connection.
o Vacuum Pump: hardwired, 480V, 60 Hz, 3-phase, 3 amps per phase
o Steam Pressure: 50 to 80 psig, condensate free and 97% to 100% vapor quality
o Steam Consumption: 185 pounds per hour
o Steam Peak Flow: 335 pounds per hour
o Steam Size: 1-inch NPT
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
110 04 November 2019
o Compressed Air: For liquid cooled and decontamination cycles
o Operating Weight: 4,700 pounds
 Options:
o 65 kW Integral stainless-steel steam generator
o Feedwater: 1/2-inch NPT 50 to 80 psig dynamic, 97-100% vapor quality
o Generator Heater Terminal Box: Hardwired, 480V, 3-phase
o Capacity of Generator Heaters: 30 kW at 240V and 22.5 kW at 208V
o Controls: hardwired, 120V, 60 Hz, 1-phase, 9.5 amps
o Drain: 1/2-inch ODT
o Wall Seal Type: 3 – Cross contamination seal on BSL-3 corridor side
o Discharge Type: 2 – Containment discharge
o Door interlock with air-differential seal
 Accessories:
o Two loading cars
o One transfer carriage
− Small Single Door Steam Autoclave:
 Cycles: Pre-vacuum, Gravity, Liquid Air-Cooled
 Chamber Size: 20 inches by 20 inches by 38 inches
 Recessed through one modular wall system with hinged access panels
 Vertical sliding foot pedal activated door operation
 Engineering Standards:
o Sterilizer Feedwater: 1.0-inch NPT, 30 to 50 psig, house DI water
o Water Consumption Cold: 140 gallons per cycle, 15 gpm (peak), 10 gpm (idle)
o Water Consumption Hot: 4 gallons per cycle, 1 gpm (peak), 1 gpm (idle)
o Water Size: 1-inch NPT
o Floor Drain: 1-1/2-inch ODT, capacity must handle peak water consumption and be
provided within confines of sterilizer
o Electrical Controls: Hardwired, 120V, 60 Hz, 1-phase, 9.5 amps
o Compressed Air: For liquid-cooled cycles
o Operating Weight: 1371 pounds
o Heat Loss at 70°F: 5,450 Btu/hr at back of wall, 3300 Btu/hr at front of wall
 Options:
o 30 kW integral carbon steel steam generator
o Feedwater: 1/2-inch NPT 50 to 80 psig dynamic, 97-100% vapor quality
o Generator Heater Terminal Box: 480V, 3-phase
o Capacity of Generator Heaters: 30 kW at 240V and 22.5 kW at 208V
o Controls: Hardwired, 120V, 60 Hz, 1-phase, 9.5 amp
o Drain: 1/2-inch ODT
o Wall Seal Type: 2 – Vermin seal
o Discharge Type: 1 – Standard discharge
 Accessories:
o One loading car
− Medium Single Door Steam Autoclave
 Cycles: Gravity, Liquid, Pre-vacuum and Liquid Air-Cooled
 Chamber Size: 26 inches by 38 inches by 48 inches
 Single horizontal sliding door
 Recessed through one wall
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 111
 Engineering Standards:
o Feedwater: 20 to 50 psig, 1-inch NPT
o Floor Drain: 2-inch ODT drain terminal, capacity must handle peak water consumption
and be provided within confines of sterilizer
o Electric Controls: Hardwired, 120V 1-phase, 60 Hz, 1 amp
o Vacuum Pump: Hardwired, 480V, 60 Hz, 3-phase, 3 amps per phase
o Steam Pressure: 50 to 80 psig, condensate free and 97% to 100% vapor quality
o Steam Consumption: 185 pounds per hour
o Steam Peak Flow: 335 pounds per hour
o Steam Size: 1-inch NPT
o Compressed Air: For liquid-cooled cycle
o Operating Weight: 4200 pounds
 Options:
o 65 kW integral stainless-steel steam generator
o Feedwater: 1/2-inch NPT 50 to 80 psig dynamic, 97-100% vapor quality
o Generator Heater Terminal Box: 480V, 3-phase
o Capacity of Generator Heaters: 30 kW at 240V and 22.5 kW at 208V
o Controls: Hardwired, 120V, 50/60 Hz, 1-phase, 9.5 A
o Drain: 1/2-inch ODT
o Wall Seal Type: 2 – Vermin seal
o Discharge Type: 1 – Standard discharge
 Accessories:
o One loading car
o One transfer carriage
• Modular Wall System:
− Prefabricated system to provide wall-to-wall enclosure of autoclave service area as indicated on
the drawings. Configure layout as noted on plans and elevations. Provide panels, column
supports, trim angles, louvers, corner posts and access doors as required to provide a permanent
self-supporting enclosure.
− Panel construction must be box-shaped fabricated of stainless steel, No. 4 satin finished on the
face side.
− Incorporate radius corners and lockable access doors as indicated on plans and elevations.
− All corners and edges must be ground smooth.
− All panels must be demountable for total accessibility to autoclave services.
11 53 43 Service Fittings and Accessories
11 53 53 Class II Biological Safety Cabinets
References
• U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Institutes of Health, Primary Containment
of Biohazards: Selection, Installation and Used of Biological Safety Cabinets (1995)
• NSF/ANSI 49 (2004)
• UL
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
112 04 November 2019
Work Included
• The contractor is responsible for preparing the spaces to receive the biological safety cabinets. All
utilities should be stubbed to the appropriate locations noted on shop drawings.
• Installation and final connection to building exhaust and piped utilities. Internal piping must be factory
installed.
Performance Standards
• Provide biological safety cabinets in the classes and types indicated.
• Class II must be defined by NSF Standard 49.
Fabrication
• Construction:
− Cabinet Exterior: 16-gauge, cold-rolled steel with baked enamel finish.
− Cabinet Interior:
 One-piece 16-gauge Type 304 stainless steel, National Association of Architectural Metal
Manufacturers No. 4 finish.
 Side walls, rear wall and work surface with 3/16-inch radiused (rounded) corners.
 Slotted side walls adjacent to front access opening for high velocity return air.
 Unitized drain pan with 1/16-inch radius on all sides and a fully removable work surface and
work surface supports to facilitate cleaning.
 Sealant joints are not permitted; provide welded, gasketed and/or hermetically sealed joints
for cabinet components to achieve a gas-tight seal when completely assembled.
− View Screen: Adjustable from fully closed to 18 inches open. Provide hinged view screen with
1/4-inch thick safety plate glass with high velocity suction slots at top and sides to prevent escape
of gases, vapors, or particulates.
− Provide all metal air plenums; flexible bags are not permitted.
− Provide stainless-steel adjustable leg leveler on a base stand. Base stand assembly must be
adjustable at a specified work surface of either 30 inches or 36 inches above finished floor.
• Illumination: Externally mounted light-emitting diode (LED) lighting fixture producing 80 to 100 foot
candles at work surface.
• Filters: One supply and one exhaust, scan-tested, zero-probe HEPA filter, 99.99% efficient on
0.3 micron particles by dispersed oil particulate test, serviceable and removable from front of unit.
Provide air balancing damper to maintain exhaust design criteria.
• Calculated Air Velocity: 100 to 110 fpm through 8-inch-high work area access opening. Provide
motor/blower combination capable of producing a constant air volume despite increased resistance in
filter loading as follows:
− 4-foot-0-inch unit: Capable of automatically handling a 60% increase in pressure drop across filter
with not more than 10% reduction in total air delivery. With manual speed controller, a 225%
increased pressure drop must be attainable.
− 6-foot-0-inch unit: Capable of automatically handling a 80% increase in pressure drop across filter
with not more than 10% reduction in total air delivery. With manual speed controller, a 180%
increased pressure drop must be attainable.
− Bulkhead Fittings (Electrical and Mechanical): Use bulkhead connectors with elastomeric seals
that are easily and cleanly removable and reusable. Penetrations using applied sealants are not
permitted. Standard blank-out plugged penetrations for future fittings must be sealed gas-tight.
− Gaskets: Neoprene or silicone rubber to suit installation conditions and cabinet function. Minimum
3/4-inch-wide by 1/8-inch-thick, fitted over bolt studs.
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 113
− Air Balance Adjustments:
 Voltage Compensating Speed Controller: Voltage compensating motor speed controller to
read incoming line voltage fluctuations and automatically adjust output voltage to maintain
constant motor voltage.
 Provide an adjustable air balancing damper to compensate for differences in resistance of
supply and exhaust filters when and if they are changed at a later date.
− Cabinet Controls: Provide moisture proof, smooth finish, solid state control panel. Labeled
buttons must control UV light, LED light, electrical outlets, motor blower, and sash audible alarm
override timer. Monitor, display and control exhaust volume via dual thermistor or pressure
transducer. Exhaust alarm set points high/low for error conditions.
− Exhaust interlock system that prevents operation of internal supply blower unless the exhaust
volume is sufficient to provide the correct air barrier inflow velocity at start up.
− Manufacturer must be listed to NSF/ANSI 49:2002 and have the NSF label affixed. Additionally,
the cabinet must be listed to UL 61010A-1 UL requirements for Laboratory Equipment electrical
safety, and must have a UL label affixed.
− Cabinet must have zoned or uniform down flow velocity profile relative to down flow velocity over
the work surface. All biologically contaminated ducts and plenums must be maintained under
negative pressure or enclosed within a negative pressure zone.
− Cabinet must be ergonomically designed providing a solid surface forearm rest. Maximum sight
lines using frameless window with ground polished edge. Ability to sit with proper posture having
a return air plenum under the work tray of not more than 3-1/2 inches high and free from any
knee obstructions. Means for a large effective work zone having the work surface usable area no
more than 5-1/2 inches from the cabinet face.
− Standard Accessories:
 Stainless-steel air diffuser and filter protector in the top of the work area
 Two petcocks in the work area sidewall piped to 3/8-inch swaglok fitting on bottom edge
(refer to the drawings for indication as to right or left side of work area)
 One stainless-steel ball valve from drain pan located in knee space
 UV light
 Protective screen under drain pan capable of preventing foreign objects from being drawn
into the blower system
 Two plugged penetrations piped to 3/8-inch Swagelok fitting on bottom, opposite installed
petcocks’ side
 Magnehelic pressure gauge
 Adjustable ergonomic footrest
Biological Safety Cabinets
• Class II Type A2: 100% Recirculating, 0% Exhaust (4BSC-1, 6BSC-1)
− Engineering Standards, 4-foot-0-inch unit:
 115V, 1-phase, 60 Hz; provide one 12-foot power cord with 20-amp plug (NEMA 5-20P)
 Unit UL-listed as certified for electrical integrity
 Blower motor (1,625 rotations per minute [RPM]): 6.6 amps
 LED light: 0.8 amp
 Two receptacles (GFI circuit breaker protected): 5.0 amps
 Total running amps: 12.4 amps
 Exhaust standards directly above exhaust filter:
o 8-inch opening: 269 cfm at 0.02- to 0.04-inch water column (WC)
o 10-inch opening: 335 cfm at 0.02 to 0.04-inch WC
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 11
114 04 November 2019
− Engineering Standards, 6-foot-0-inch unit:
 115V, 1-phase, 60 Hz; provide one 12-foot power cord with 20-amp plug (NEMA 5-20P)
 Unit UL-listed as certified for electrical integrity
 Blower motor (1,625 RPM): 10.9 amps
 LED light: 0.8 amp
 Two receptacles (GFI circuit breaker protected): 3.0 amps
 Total running amps: 15.8 amps
 Exhaust standards directly above exhaust filter:
o 8-inch opening: 408 cfm at 0.02 to 0.04-inch WC
o 10-inch opening: 510 cfm at 0.02 to 0.04-inch WC
• Class II Type A2 – 70% Recirculating, 30% with Exhaust Transition Unit (4BSC-2, 6BSC-2)
− Provide a canopy exhaust connection transition unit to the 10-inch-round duct
− Engineering Standards 4-foot-0-inch unit with Canopy Exhaust Connection:
 115V, 1-phase, 60 Hz; provide one 12-foot power cord with 20-amp plug (NEMA 5-20P)
 Unit UL listed as certified for electrical integrity
 Blower motor (1,625 RPM): 6.6 amps
 LED light: 0.8 amp
 Two receptacles (GFI circuit breaker protected): 5.0 amps
 Total running amps: 12.4 amps
 Exhaust standards directly above exhaust filter:
o 8-inch sash height: 320-520 cfm at 0.05 to 0.25-inch WC
o 10-inch sash height: 401-585 cfm at 0.08 to 0.30-inch WC
− Engineering Standards 6-foot-0-inch unit with Canopy Exhaust Connection:
 115V, 1-phase, 60 Hz; provide one 12-foot power cord with 20-amp plug (NEMA 5-20P)
 Unit UL-listed as certified for electrical integrity
 Blower motor (1,625 RPM): 10.9 amps
 LED light: 0.8 amp
 Two receptacles (GFI circuit breaker protected): 3.0 amps
 Total running amps: 15.8 amps
 Exhaust standards directly above exhaust filter:
o 8-inch sash height: 408 cfm at 0.02 to 0.04-inch WC
o 10-inch sash height: 510 cfm at 0.02 to 0.04-inch WC
• Class II, Type B2 – 0% Recirculating, 100% Exhaust, Hard Ducted (4BSC-3, 6BSC-3)
− Provide an Exhaust Transition Unit to 10- or 12-inch round duct with access panel for filter
leak testing
− Engineering Standards 4-foot-0-inch unit:
 115V, 1-phase, 60 Hz; provide one 12-foot power cord with 20-amp plug (NEMA 5-20P)
 Unit UL listed as certified for electrical integrity.
 Blower motor (1,625 RPM): 3.2 amps
 LED light: 0.8 amps
 Two receptacles (GFI circuit breaker protected): 5.0 amps
 Total running amps: 9.0 amps
 Exhaust standards directly above exhaust filter:
o 8-inch sash height: 750-800 cfm at 1.4 to 1.9-inch WC (10-inch duct); 1.2- to 1.7-inch
(12-inch duct)
− Engineering Standards 6-foot-0-inch unit:
 115V, 1-phase, 60 Hz; provide one 12-foot power cord with 20-amp plug – NEMA 5-20P
 Unit UL listed as certified for electrical integrity
 Blower motor (1,625 RPM): 10.9 amps
 LED light: 0.8 amp
DIVISION 11 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 115
 Two receptacles (GFI circuit breaker protected): 3.0 amps
 Total running amps: 15.8 amps
 Exhaust Standards directly above exhaust filter:
o 8-inch sash height: 1,150 to 1,200 cfm at 2.0 to 2.6-inch WC (10-inch duct); 1.5- to
2.1-inch WC (12-inch duct)
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 117
DIVISION 12 FURNISHINGS
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 12 work include the following:
• Design and installation of exterior furnishings must meet the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements
(USAF, 2019b). Such furnishings must be designed and detailed to meet all requirements of the
High-Velocity Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC for the applicable sections
related to their material types.
• Furnishings must be designed for strength, security, and heavy use.
• Applicable manufactured products falling under this category for exterior use must have a current
Miami-Dade NOA that demonstrates compliance with the wind pressures determined from the
wind speed.
• Furnishings must comply with Universal Design standards.
12 20 00 WINDOW TREATMENTS
12 21 00 Window Blinds
Provide 1-inch aluminum mini-blinds with a wand for manual tilt operation and pull chord to raise and
lower blinds. Vertical blinds collect less dust than horizontal ones and are encouraged.
12 24 00 Sun Control Devices
Sun-control devices must be integrated on the building exteriors to shield direct sunlight on glazing and to
reduce cooling load and glare while maximizing daylight to interior spaces. These devices must be
integrated into the building construction to not appear as an afterthought addition. Units must be designed
so they do not collect dirt and allow for easy window cleaning. Sun-control devices may include
overhangs, canopies, louvers, solar screens, and trellises. Light shelves installed on the exterior (and/or
interior) of windows are another type of shading device that increase light penetration into the building
interior. Elements typically include horizontal, vertical, cantilevered, and suspended, supports and
surfaces. The material for exterior sun control devices may be of concrete or aluminum. Elements
connected to the window, storefront, or curtainwall framing systems must be provided as a part of that
system to ensure supplier and fabricator address connections and loads.
12 26 00 Interior Daylighting Devices
Interior automated sun control devices (for example, roller shade window treatments), controlled by
daylight sensors may also be deployed during portions of the day to mitigate heat gain and glare.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
118 04 November 2019
12 30 00 CASEWORK
12 35 53 Metal Laboratory Casework
Reference Standards
All casework, work surface, and service fixture construction and performance characteristics must be in
full compliance with Scientific Equipment and Furniture Association (SEFA) standards. At the Owner’s
request, independent, third-party testing must be submitted validating compliance and adheres to the
architectural specifications.
• SEFA 2.3, Installation of Scientific Laboratory Furniture and Equipment
• SEFA 3, Work Surfaces
• SEFA 7, Laboratory and Hospital Fixtures
• SEFA 8, Laboratory Furniture
Definitions
General: Each portion of laboratory casework units is defined as “Exposed,” “Semi-exposed,” or
“Concealed,” as follows:
• Exposed portions of casework include surfaces visible when doors and drawers are closed. Bottoms
of cases more than 4 feet-0 inches above floor must be considered as exposed. Visible members in
open cases or behind glass doors also must be considered as exposed portions.
• Semi exposed portions of casework includes those members behind opaque doors, such as shelves,
divisions, interior faces of ends, case back (when not exposed), drawer sides, backs and bottoms,
and back face of doors. Tops of cases 6 feet-6 inches or more above floor must be considered semi
exposed.
• Concealed portions of casework include sleepers, web frames, dust panels, and other surfaces not
usually visible after installation.
Quality Assurance
• Single Source Responsibility: Provide laboratory casework with tops, sinks, and service fixtures
that have been manufactured or supplied by same laboratory casework company for single
responsibility.
− A single company, whose principal business is the manufacture and supply of metal laboratory
casework, is required to assume responsibility for all the work specified in this section, including
metal laboratory casework and other items as specified.
− Laboratory fume hoods specified herein must be fully integrated with casework as shown on
drawings and should be furnished by the same laboratory casework company.
− Submit a statement of qualification showing adequate experience in manufacturing laboratory
casework of the type and scope specified. Statement of qualification must include a list of at least
five comparable installations of similar size and scope, fabricated within the past 5 years. Failure
to submit this statement of responsibility and ability to produce may be sufficient grounds for
rejection of bid.
− All casework construction and performance characteristics must be in full compliance with
SEFA 8, Current Standards. At the Owner’s request, independent, third-party testing must be
submitted validating compliance and adheres to the architectural specifications.
• Chemical and Physical Resistance of Finish:
− General: Submit an independent testing laboratory report certifying that the exterior finish of
laboratory casework is capable of withstanding following tests with no change, or slight change of
gloss, slight discoloration, or slight temporary softening of film with no loss of adhesion and no
loss of film protection.
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 119
− Acids: Not less than 5 drops (0.25 cc) applied to finish surface, covered with watch glass for
60 minutes, then washed and dried.
• Fixed Casework Fabrication:
− Base Units and Cases:
 Base units and 31-inch-high wall cases: End panels and back must be reinforced with internal
reinforcing front and rear posts.
 49-inch- and 84-inch-high cases: Formed end panels with front and rear reinforcing post
channels; back must be formed steel panel, recessed 3/4 inch for mounting purposes.
 Posts: Front post fully closed with full height reinforcing upright. Shelf adjustment holes in
front and rear posts must be perfectly aligned for level setting, adjustable to 1/2 inch on
center.
 Secure intersection of case members with spot and arc welds. Provide gusset reinforcement
at front corners.
 Base Unit Backs: Provide drawer units without backs and cupboard units with removable
backs for access to services behind units.
 Bottoms: Base units and 31- and 49-inch-high wall cases must have one-piece bottom with
front edge formed into front rail, rabbeted as required for swinging doors and drawers and
flush design for sliding doors.
 Top Rail for Base Units: Interlock with end panels, flush with front of unit.
 Horizontal Intermediate Rails: Recessed behind doors and drawer fronts.
 Base for Base Units: 4 inches high by 3 inches deep with formed steel base and 11-gauge
die-formed steel gussets at corners. Provide 3/8-inch-diameter leveling screw with integral
bottom flange of minimum 0.56 square inch area at each corner, accessible through openings
in toe space.
 Tops of Wall Cases: One piece, with front edge formed into front rail.
− Drawers:
 Drawer Fronts: 3/4-inch-thick, double wall construction, pre-painted prior to assembly and
sound deadened.
 Drawer Bodies: Bottom and sides formed into one-piece center section with bottom and sides
coved and formed top edges. Front and back panels spot welded to center section.
 Drawer Suspension: Heavy-duty coved raceways for both case and drawer with nylon tired,
ball bearing rollers; self-centering and self-closing when open to within 3 inches of the closed
position.
 Provide drawer with rubber bumpers. Friction-centering devices are not acceptable.
 Provide security panels for drawers with keyed different locks.
 File drawers: Provide with 150-pound full extension slides for full access and operation.
Provide file hanger rails at all file drawers noted in plans.
− Doors:
 Solid Panel Doors: 3/4-inch-thick, double wall, telescoping box steel construction with interior
pre-painted and sound deadened, top corners welded and ground smooth. Reinforce interior
of front panel with welded steel hat channels. Hinges with screws to internal 14-gauge
reinforcing in case and door. Hinges must be removable; welding of hinges is not acceptable.
Doors must close against rubber bumpers.
 Frame Glazed Doors: Outer head must be one piece construction. Inner head must consist of
top, bottom, and side framing members that are removable for installation or replacement of
glass. Provide continuous vinyl glazing retainer to receive glass. In all other respects, framed
glazed door construction and quality must match solid panel doors.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
120 04 November 2019
− Drawer Suspension: Heavy-duty coved raceways for both case and drawer with nylon tired, ball
bearing rollers; self-centering and self-closing when open to within 3 inches of the closed position.
Use SEFA 8 Accuride (or equal) 150-pound full-extension drawer slides. For file drawers, provide
150-pound full-extension slides for full access and operation.
 Provide drawers with rubber bumpers. Friction centering devices are not acceptable.
 Provide security panels for drawers with keyed different locks.
− Shelves: Reinforce shelves over 36-inch-long with welded hat channel reinforcement the full
width of shelf.
− Base molding: 4 inches high, must be furnished and installed by flooring contractor.
• Stainless-Steel Casework Fabrication:
− Base Units and Cases:
 Base units and 25-, 31-, and 37-inch-high wall cases: End panels and back must be
reinforced with internal reinforcing front and rear posts.
 49- and 84-inch-high cases: Formed end panels with front and rear reinforcing post channels;
back must be formed stainless-steel panel, recessed 3/4-inch for mounting purposes.
 Posts: Front post fully closed with full height reinforcing upright. Shelf adjustment holes in
front and rear posts must be perfectly aligned for level setting, adjustable to 1/2 inch on
center.
 Secure intersection of case members with spot and arc welds. Provide gusset reinforcement
at front corners.
 Base Unit Backs: Provide drawer units without backs and cupboard units with removable
backs for access to services behind units.
− Drawers:
 Solid Panel Drawers: 3/4-inch thick, double wall, telescoping box stainless-steel construction
and sound deadened.
 Drawer Bodies: Bottom and sides must be formed into a one-piece center section with bottom
and sides coved and formed top edges. Front and back panels spot welded to center section.
 Drawer Suspension: 150-pound full-extension drawer slides, stainless-steel.
 Provide drawers with rubber bumpers. Friction centering devices are not acceptable.
 Provide security panels for drawers with keyed different locks.
 File drawers: Provide with 150-pound full-extension slides for full access and operation.
− Doors:
 Solid Panel Doors: 3/4-inch-thick, double wall, telescoping box, stainless-steel construction,
with interior polished and sound deadened. Reinforce interior of front panel with welded,
stainless-steel hat channels. Hinges with screws to internal 14-gauge reinforcing in case and
door. Hinges must be removable; welding of hinges not acceptable. Doors must close against
rubber bumpers.
 Frame Glazed Doors: Outer head must be one piece construction. Inner head must consist of
top, bottom, and side framing members that are removable for installation or replacement of
glass. Provide continuous vinyl glazing retainer to receive glass. In all other respects, framed
glazed door construction and quality must match solid panel doors.
 Sliding Doors: Solid or framed glazed. Design for tilt-out removal after removal of bottom
guide. Doors must be hung with nylon tired sleeve bearing rollers in formed stainless-steel
top-hung track and must close against rubber bumpers.
 Unframed Sliding Glass Doors: Glass with edges ground set in extruded aluminum shoe with
integral pulls, wheel assemblies, and top and bottom extruded aluminum track. Provide
rubber bumpers at fully opened and closed door position.
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 121
− Shelves:
 Form front and back edges down and back 3/4 inch. Form ends down 3/4 inch.
 Reinforce shelves more than 36 inches long with hat channel reinforcement for the full width
of the shelf.
 Pull-out Shelves: Same suspension as specified for drawers.
− Base Molding: must be furnished and installed by flooring contractor.
− Hardware:
 Drawer and Hinged Door Pulls: Stainless-steel wire pulls with screws attached on 4-inch
centers.
 Sliding Door Pulls: Recessed stainless-steel, styled and sized to harmonize with drawer pulls.
 Hinges: Institutional type, five-knuckle projecting barrel hinges, minimum 2-1/2 inches long,
Type 302 or 304 stainless steel. Provide two hinges for doors up to 36 inches high; three
hinges for doors greater than 36 inches high. Drill each leaf for three stainless-steel screw
attachment to door and frame.
 Door Catches: Adjustable type, spring actuated nylon roller catches.
 Elbow Catches: Spring type of cadmium plated steel, with strike of suitable design.
 Locks: Five-pin tumbler, heavy-duty cylinder type. Exposed lock noses must be dull (satin)
plated and stamped with identifying numbers.
 Keying: Locks must have capacity for 225 primary key changes. Master key one level with
the potential of 40 different, non-interchangeable master key groups. Lock locations must be
shown on the drawings.
 Keys: Stamped brass available from manufacturer or local locksmith, and supplied in the
following quantities unless otherwise specified:
o 2 for each keyed different lock
o 3 for each group keyed alike locks
o 2 for master keys for each system
 Label Holders: Formed stainless-steel with No. 4 finish, 1 inch by 1-1/2 inches, screw
installed. Locations must be shown on the drawings.
 Shelf Clips: Die-formed, stainless-steel designed to engage in shelf adjustment holes.
• Vacuum Pump Storage Cabinet:
− Self-supporting Units: Completely welded shell assembly without applied panels at ends, backs,
or top panel so that cases can be used interchangeably or as a single, standalone unit.
− Interior of Case Units: Acoustically treated sides, back, and top panels with sound-deadening
materials. Base cabinets, 30 inches and wider, with double swinging doors must provide full
access to complete interior without center vertical post.
− Fabrication:
 Vacuum pump storage to provide a means to store and vent vacuum pumps and their
emissions and heat loads.
 Vacuum pump cabinet must have concealed hinged doors. Vacuum pump cabinet must have
removable back panel(s) for utility access and visual inspection. Back panel(s) must
incorporate an integral 2-1/2-inch vent hole for a separate vent assembly.
 Vacuum pump cabinet must incorporate acoustical insulation on the interior door panels,
sides, back and underside of the top panel. Insulation must be an open cell foam of
clonal design.
 Storage unit must incorporate an integral electrical switch (120V, 20 amp) with pilot light to
indicate the operational mode of the vacuum pump unit.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
122 04 November 2019
 Storage unit must have an electrical duplex outlet, located in the rear of the cabinet, for the
vacuum pump plug end. Outlet configuration must be NEMA 5-20R. Outlet must be
accessible from the inside of the cabinet. Outlet must be hard-wired to the electrical switch.
 Separate mobile platform must be capable of supporting 300 pounds. Front two casters must
be locking/swivel models. Lipped construction must safely contain any accidental spills.
 Optional door louvers will be incorporated when the exhaust fan is specified.
 Switch must be supplied with an optional 20-foot-long, 1/2-inch trade-size flexible
metal conduit.
 Optional voltage transformer (mounted in flush panel) must be factory installed in the flush
front panel to provide a variable voltage source for instrumentation. Provide a metal
enclosure, cover plate, toggle switch, duplex electrical receptacle, fuse holder and pilot light.
Electrical input 120VAC, 60 Hz, output 140VAC, 10 amp. Voltage transformer will be supplied
with a 20-foot-long, 1/2-inch trade-size flexible metal conduit.
 An optional 235 cfm exhaust fan will be supplied for greater heat loads. The exhaust fan
assembly will be attached to exterior of the cabinet for maximum pump storage and airflow.
The fan assembly must incorporate a 4-inch-diameter duct collar connection. Connection to
the building HVAC exhaust by others.
 Vacuum Pump Cabinet Nominal Dimensions:
Width: 24 inches
Depth: 25 inches with electrical junction box; 29-5/8 inches with exhaust fan housing
Height: 35.166 inches
 Mobile Pump Platform Nominal Dimensions:
Width: 21 inches
Depth: 17.863 inches
Height: 5.750 inches
• Undercounter Ventilated Cabinets:
− Construction: Construct as specified for metal laboratory casework.
− Ventilation: Provide a 2-inch polypropylene vent pipe at the outside rear of the cabinet with two
inlets (one high and one low). Secure vent pipe inlets to back of cabinet with polypropylene
locking nuts. Extend vent pipe to 4 inches above the hood work surface.
− Doors: Provide with louvered vents near bottom of each door and polypropylene or acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene (ABS) roller catches with plastic screws.
− Bottom: Provide with one-piece, 1/4-inch thick heat welded, polyethylene plastic pan, liquid tight,
removable, 1-inch deep.
− Shelving: Provide with a half depth, adjustable shelf for the full width of the cabinet, polypropylene
shelf clips.
− Identification: All ventilated storage cabinets must be marked with conspicuous lettering:
CAUTION – CORROSIVES.
− Finish: As specified for metal laboratory casework. Color must be selected by the Architect.
• Flammable Storage Cabinets:
− Description: Design and construct in accordance with OSHA Regulations and the requirements of
NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code. Cabinets must be Factory Mutual-approved
and UL-listed. Cabinets must limit the internal temperature at the center 1 inch from the top to not
more than 325°F when subjected to the fire test for storage cabinets as described in NFPA 30.
− Casing: Bottom, top, back, door, and sides of cabinet must be at least 18-gauge sheet steel,
double walled with 1-1/2-inch air space. Joints must be welded airtight. Provide with adjustable
zinc plated leveling legs.
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 123
− Doors: Provide with continuous piano hinge and a three-point latch arrangement with doorsill
raised at least 2 inches above the bottom of the cabinet to retain spilled liquid within the cabinet.
− Ventilation: Cabinet must not be ventilated unless required by local authorities and where noted
on Mechanical drawings. Vent openings of non-ventilated cabinets must be sealed with plugs,
inside and outside, supplied by the manufacturer.
− Shelving: Provide with a full width adjustable shelf.
− Grounding: Cabinets must be grounded.
− Identification: All flammable storage cabinets must be marked with conspicuous lettering:
FLAMMABLE - KEEP FIRE AWAY.
− Finish: Finish as specified for metal laboratory casework must be chemical-resistant acrylic
urethane.
• Table Frames:
− Table Frames: 4-1/2-inch-high "C" channel front and back aprons, end rails, and cross rails.
− Legs: 2-inch by 2-inch steel tube legs with welded leg bracket. Attach legs with two bolts to front
and back aprons and weld to end rails. Each leg must have a recessed leveling screw and a
black, coved vinyl or rubber leg shoe, 2 inches in height.
− Knee Space Frame: 2-inch-high apron where no drawers required.
− Leg Rails and Stretchers: Channel formed.
− Provide castors where indicated on drawings. All casters must be locking/swivel model types.
• Stainless-Steel Table Frames:
− Table Frames: 4-1/2-inch-high "C" channel front and back aprons, end rails and cross rails.
− Table Drawers: Provide front and back rails; drawer unit, hardware, and suspension same as
specified for base unit drawers.
− Legs: 2-inch by 2-inch stainless-steel tube legs with welded leg bracket. Attach legs with two bolts
to front and back aprons and weld to end rails. Each leg must have a recessed leveling screw
and a black, coved vinyl or rubber leg shoe, 2 inches in height.
− Knee Space Frame: 2-inch-high apron where no drawers are required.
− Leg Rails and Stretchers: Channel formed.
• Modular Component Laboratory Casework System:
− Modular dimensioned system of core and panel style support structures and tables.
− Cores and Panels: Support structure for tables, storage units and shelves, and service chase for
all service and drain lines.
 Modular units must be suitable for peninsula or island configurations.
 Cores can be supported with floor plates bolted to floor or with structural tables.
 Equipped with easy-to-remove access panels with integral fasteners.
− Tables: Modular, interchangeable work surface support structures in both fixed-height and
adjustable-height configurations:
 Fixed-height tables include two-leg, structural- and extended-frame configurations.
 Adjustable-height tables include cantilever and four-leg mechanical adjustable configurations.
 Provide casters as required.
 All casters must be locking/swivel model types.
− System Standards:
 Independently support work surfaces, under-counter cabinets, and overhead storage
components.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
124 04 November 2019
 Structural components are essentially self-supporting and independent of the building
structure.
 Core-type support structures support cupsinks, service fittings, fixtures, and supply and waste
lines must use commercially available pipe clamps.
 Cabinet fastening devices cannot be accidentally released from framing system. Intentional
release can be easily accomplished without disturbing the cabinet contents by simply
loosening two bolts.
 Suspended base cabinets can be removed without removal of the work surface.
 Suspended base cabinets can be relocated while fully loaded and installed in any position
between table legs.
 Vertical height of table work surfaces, wall cases and shelves can be adjusted with simple,
but positive mechanisms.
− 12-inch Core Support Structures:
 General standards:
o Riser uprights: 16-gauge rolled steel supplied with leveling guides
o Frames: Rolled steel, resistance welded; frame members and tie rail brackets must be
16-gauge; corner gussets must be 14-gauge
o Tie rails: 16-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Base cover: 18-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Slotted adjustment punched into riser upright: notched for one inch adjustment of
components supported off riser upright
o Riser cap: Flame-resistant ABS plastic, color matched
o Closure panels: 20-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Closure panel fasteners: "Dual-lock"
o Adjustable floor clamps: Two per core or frame; 80-55-06 ductile cast iron
o Plug caps: ABS flame retardant plastic, color matched
o 1/4-inch clear tempered glass where glass is indicated on drawings
− Island Cores:
 Nominal dimensions:
o Width: 60 inches, unless noted otherwise on drawings
o Depth: 12 inches
o Height: 84 inches
 Service area: Minimum 5.50 inches by 18.25 inches between uprights and tie rails for service
installation.
 Floor clamps: 80-55-06 ductile cast iron, supplied with three rawl bolts for concrete floor
anchorage.
 Core must be capable of having removable uprights and reagent shelf.
 Core must be capable of having reagent shelf and uprights added after installation.
 Core, when secured to floor, must be capable of supporting worst-case loading conditions
without endriggers.
 Hanging components (cantilever table frames, wall cases, shelves, and similar) must be
vertically adjustable in 1-inch increments.
 Closure panels must snap on without tools and must be removable without removal of
cantilever table frames or suspended cabinetry.
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 125
 Installed 84-inch-high core must support following components, each loaded to its maximum
rating for a total of 2,820 pounds.
o Inside and outside shelves: 12-inch = 180 pounds; 18-inch = 130 pounds; 24-inch =
100 pounds
o Wall cases: 300 pounds
o Two cantilever work surfaces: 600 pounds each side
− Island Panels:
 Nominal dimensions:
o Width: As required per panel
o Depth: 3.25 inches
o Height of lower panels: 36 inches
o Height of upper panels: 48 inches
o Full height panels: 84 inches
 Upper and lower panels must be of the same materials and construction.
 Lower panel must be capable of having upper panel removed.
 Lower panel must be capable of having upper panel added after installation.
 Components (cantilever table frames, shelves, and similar) supported off upper and lower
panels must be vertically adjustable in one inch increments.
 Closure panels for upper and lower panels must snap on without tools and must be
removable without removal of cantilever table frames or suspended cabinetry.
 Installed 84-inch-high island panels must support following components and loads:
o Outside shelves or wall cases, each loaded to maximum capacity
o Two cantilever work surfaces, each loaded with 400 pounds; or two structural tables,
each loaded with 600 pounds
− Service Umbilical:
 Corner uprights and column covers: 18-gauge cold-rolled steel.
 Upright connectors: 20-gauge cold-rolled steel.
 Column must be capable of connecting island cores together when cores are assembled in
L-shaped, T-shaped, or cross configuration.
 Column must be capable of increasing modularity of island core one foot (for example, one
3-foot island core plus a universal column equals modularity of a 4-foot island).
 Column must provide means to bring services down from the ceiling into an island core.
 Column must provide closure column to go from service chase to house services in ceiling.
 Column when used with an island core must be capable of supporting components within the
resulting module (for example, one 4-foot cantilever table must be capable of hanging off a
3-foot island core/universal column combination).
 Installed 84-inch-high universal column/island core combination must support following
components, each loaded to its maximum rating for a total of 2,820 pounds:
o Inside and outside shelves
o Wall cases
o Two cantilever work surfaces
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
126 04 November 2019
 Corner Column:
o Nominal dimensions:
 Depth/width combination: 12 inches by 12 inches
 Height: As required
o Corner uprights and column covers: 18-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Upright connectors: 20-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Columns must:
 Provide means to bring services down from the ceiling into an island core
 Provide closure column to go from 84 inches up to 120 inches to house services
 Be capable of connecting island core to wall core
 Be capable of connecting wall core to wall core
 Be capable of connecting island cores together when cores are assembled in
L-shaped, T-shaped, or cross configuration
 Service Column:
o Nominal dimensions:
 Width: 12 inches
 Depth: 12 inches
o Height: As required to span between floor and ceiling
o Uprights: 20-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Angles: 18-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Columns must:
 Be capable of enclosing services which enter through the center of an island core
 Be capable of being constructed around existing services
 Include panels that snap on without tools
− 6-inch Core Support Structures:
 General Standards:
o Riser uprights: 6-inch-wide 16-gauge cold-rolled steel supplied with leveling guides
o Slotted adjustment punched into riser upright: notched for 1 inch adjustment of
components supported off riser upright
o Frames: Cold-rolled steel, resistance welded; frame members and tie rail brackets:
16-gauge; corner gussets: 14-gauge
o Base rails: 16-gauge
o Top Rail Assembly: 16-gauge top rail; 18-gauge reinforcement channel
o Intermediate Cross Rails: 16-gauge
o Closure panels: 20-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Closure panel fasteners: "Dual-lock"
o Adjustable floor clamps: Two per frame; 11-gauge cold-rolled steel
o Plug caps: ABS flame-retardant plastic, color matched
o 1/4-inch clear tempered glass where glass is indicated on drawings
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 127
 Structural Utility Frame:
o Nominal dimensions:
 Width: As indicated on plans
 Depth: 6 inches
 Height: As required
o Service area: Minimum (two each 3-inch by 8-inch; above 36-inch work height, two each
4-inch by 8-inch horizontal utility chase below 36-inch work height) between uprights and
tie rails for service installation.
o Floor clamps: 11-gauge cold-rolled steel, supplied with one rawl bolt for concrete floor
anchorage.
o Frame must be capable of anchoring to the floor, and/or anchoring to the base cabinets,
and attaching to the ceiling grid at various heights, with infinite adjustment, with two
telescoping riser extensions. Short riser extension: 7 feet 9 inches to 9 feet 3 inches.
o Frame, when secured to the floor and ceiling grid or building structure, must be capable
of supporting worst-case loading conditions without endriggers.
o Hanging components (cantilever table frames, wall cases, shelves, and similar) must be
vertically adjustable in 1-inch increments.
o Closure panels must snap on without tools and must be removable without removal of
cantilever table frames or suspended cabinetry.
o Installed 84-inch-high core must support following components, each loaded to its
maximum rating for a total of 2,280 pounds (evenly balanced on both sides):
 Outside shelves: 12-inch = 180 pounds; 18-inch = 130 pounds; 24-inch = 100 pounds
 Wall cases: 300 pounds
 Two cantilever work surfaces: 600 pounds each side
− Ceiling Channel:
 Bottom ceiling channel must be manufactured from 20-gauge cold-rolled steel to provide a
positive means of attachment to the ceiling T-grid system and/or solid ceiling deck and the
telescoping vertical riser.
 Upper ceiling channel (suspended ceiling only) must be manufactured from 18-gauge
galvanized steel. Ceiling panel must be sandwiched between the upper and lower channel
and must be drilled with self-tapping screws to provide a semi-permanent, secured,
non-skidding ceiling attachment.
• Tables:
− General standards:
 Work surface support frame: 11-gauge cold-rolled steel tubing. Cabinet support channels:
14-gauge cold-rolled steel. Weld members using the inert gas process.
 Support arms:
o Cantilever support arms: 11-gauge cold-rolled steel
o 4 leg adjustable height support arms: 11-gauge rolled steel
 End caps: Flame-resistant ABS plastic, color matched
 Finish: Chemical-resistant powder paint finish in manufacturer's standard color must be
selected
 Provide castors as indicated on drawings
 All casters must be locking/swivel model types
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
128 04 November 2019
− Cantilever Table Frame:
 Capable of vertical adjustment in 1-inch increments.
 Hanging hook: Five support fingers of 11-gauge cold-rolled steel.
 Leveling/locking stud: Provide in the leg member and design to engage the upright and
provide a positive means of locking the cantilever table frame to the upright. Stud must be
capable of raising front edge of the work surface 0.120 to 0.150 inch for leveling purposes.
 Cantilever table frame must provide support channels from which suspended cabinets can be
hung and adjusted horizontally.
 Total width of suspended cabinets must be less than the table width to allow for clearance for
table frame uprights on 24 inches deep table frames.
o Weight capacity: Work surface plus 600 pounds
 Four Leg Adjustable-Height Table:
o Nominal base dimensions: Height range: 28 to 37-3/8 inches
o Freestanding table capable of supporting suspended base cabinets
o Table can be equipped with levelers or casters
o Outer leg: 11-gauge rolled steel C-channel
o Inner telescoping leg: 16-gauge rolled steel rectangular tubing
o Adjustment mechanism: Mechanical with locking bolts
o Weight capacity: Levelers = 600 pounds; casters = 300 pounds
• Suspended Base Cabinets/Wall Cases:
− Design standards, performance standards, materials, fabrication, and hardware must comply in
all respects with fixed wood and/or steel casework specifications in this section.
− Suspended cabinet hardware: Provide a system of steel C-channels and brackets attached to the
casework frames, enabling the installation and removal of suspended base cabinets without the
use of special tools.
− Suspended wall case hardware: Provide a system of 11-gauge cold-rolled steel hanger rails
attached to the casework frames, must be vertically adjustable on 1-inch increments. Installation
and removal of suspended wall cases must be accomplished without the use of tools.
• Shelves, as part of Modular Component Casework System:
− General standards for shelves:
 Shelves, hat channel supports, and separate shelf lip: 18-gauge rolled steel
 Shelf brackets: 11-gauge rolled steel
 Shelf brackets should be the same nominal dimensions as on the modular component
casework system standards; shelves, where possible, must be constructed such that they are
interchangeable between the 6-inch core version shelving and typical wall shelving units
 Vertical shelf adjustment: 1-inch increments
 Depth and weight capacity: 8-inch = 180 pounds, 12-inch = 180 pounds
 Provide shelf top face 1-inch thick phenolic resin
− Outside shelf in island condition with 12-inch core:
 Nominal dimensions:
o Length: 60 inches
o Depth: As indicated on drawings plus half of the core depth
 Shelf must be capable of being locked into position
 Shelf brackets must rise above the shelf surface to provide sides
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 129
 Outside shelf must be integral and cross into core area with back shelf lip edge; this is in lieu
of a separate inside shelf unit at the core
− Outside shelf in island condition with 6-inch core:
 Nominal dimensions:
o Length: 60 inches
o Depth: As indicated on the drawings
 Shelf must be capable of being locked into position
 Shelf brackets must rise above the shelf surface to provide sides
 Outside shelf to include back shelf lip edge
− Service/Utility Distribution: Refer to Division 26, Electrical, for components
• Casework Metal Finish:
− Preparation: Spray clean metal with a heated cleaner/phosphate solution, pre-treat with iron
phosphate spray, water rinse, and neutral final seal. Immediately dry in heated ovens, gradually
cooled, prior to application of finish.
− Application: Electrostatically apply urethane powder coat of selected color and bake in controlled
high temperature oven to assure a smooth, hard satin finish. Surfaces must have a chemicalresistant,
high-grade laboratory furniture quality finish of the following thickness. Liquid, dipped, or
solvent-based finishes are not acceptable.
 Exterior and interior exposed surfaces: 1.5 mil average and 1.2 mil minimum
 Backs of cabinets and other surfaces not exposed to view: 1.2 mil average
− Cabinet Surface Finish Tests: All casework construction and performance characteristics must be
in full compliance with SEFA 8 standards. At the Owner’s request, independent, third-party
performance testing must be submitted validating compliance and adheres to the finish
specifications.
• Hardware:
− Door/Drawer Pulls:
 Matt stainless-steel finger pull-contour
 Pull Direction at Drawers and Doors: Horizontal on drawers and base cabinet doors (wall,
upper and tall cases always have vertical pulls)
− Hinges: Institutional type, Concealed hinge, three point adjustment, nickel plated steel. Selfclosing
mechanism (No catch is required). Hinge allows 165-degree swing of doors for full access
of cabinet. Provide two hinges for doors up to 36 inches high; three hinges for doors more than
36 inches high. Drill each leaf to accommodate two screw attachments to the door and frame.
− Door catches: Not permitted.
− Elbow catches: Spring type of cadmium plated steel, with strike of suitable design.
− Locks: National Lock Remove-A-Core five-disc tumbler, heavy-duty cylinder type. Exposed lock
noses must be dull nickel (satin) plated and stamped with identifying numbers.
− Keying: Locks (show locations on the drawings) must have capacity for 2,000 primary key
changes. Master key one level with built in flexibility to accommodate, if required, three levels,
1 Grandmaster, 59 Master groups, and 70 Sub-master groups with 13 primary changes
under each.
− Keys: Stamped brass available from the manufacturer or local locksmith, and supplied in the
following quantities unless otherwise specified:
 2 for each keyed different lock
 3 for each group keyed alike locks
 2 for master keys for each system
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
130 04 November 2019
− Shelf clips: Die formed steel, zinc plated, designed to engage in shelf adjustment holes.
− File followers: Metal backs engaging in steel bottom channel, with spring positioning lock. Provide
unit at each file drawer in plans.
• Casework Materials:
− Sheet steel: Mild, cold-rolled and leveled unfinished steel.
− Minimum gauges:
 20-gauge: Solid door interior panels, drawer fronts, scribing strips, filler panels, enclosures,
drawer bodies, shelves, security panels and sloping tops
 18-gauge: Case tops, ends, bottoms, bases, backs, vertical posts, uprights, glazed door
members, door exterior panels and access panels
 16-gauge: Top front rails, top rear gussets, intermediate horizontal rails, table legs and
frames, leg rails and stretchers
 14-gauge: Drawer suspensions, door and case hinge reinforcements and front corner
reinforcements
 11-gauge: Table leg corner brackets and gussets for leveling screws
− Glass for glazed swinging and sliding doors and/or unframed doors:
 6 mm safety glass, laminated (framed)
 6 mm safety glass, tempered (framed)
• Stainless Casework Materials:
− Sheet Steel: Mild, cold-rolled and leveled Type 304 stainless steel (No. 4 mill finish on all
exposed surfaces)
− Minimum Gauges:
 20-gauge: Solid door interior panels, drawer fronts, scribing strips, filler panels, enclosures,
drawer bodies, shelves, security panels and sloping tops
 18-gauge: Case tops, ends, bottoms, bases, backs, vertical posts, uprights, glazed door
members, door exterior panels and access panels
 16-gauge: Top front rails, top rear gussets, intermediate horizontal rails, table legs and
frames, leg rails and stretchers
 14-gauge: Drawer suspensions, door and case hinge reinforcements and front corner
reinforcements
 11-gauge: Table leg corner brackets and gussets for leveling screws
− Glass for glazed swinging and sliding doors: 1/8-inch (3 mm) framed doors, 7/32-inch (6 mm)
unframed doors thick, clear float glass.
− All spot welds must be ground smooth, cleaned, and polished with no visible markings or grind
marks.
• Casework Design Standards:
− Flush Overlay Construction: Surfaces of doors and drawers must overlay the cabinet ends, top or
bottom rails. Horizontal and vertical case shell members (panels, top rails, and bottoms) must be
concealed behind drawer and door fronts. Reveals must be a uniform 1/8 inch horizontally
between drawer and door fronts and 5/16 inch vertically between adjacent steel drawer and door
fronts.
− Slimline Styling: Front width of the end panels must be 3/4 inch, and the front height of the top
and bottom members must be 1 inch.
− Self-supporting Units: Completely welded shell assembly without applied panels at ends, backs,
or bottoms, so that cases can be used interchangeably or as a single, stand-alone unit.
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 131
− Interior of Case Units: Easily cleanable, flush interior. Base cabinets, 30 inches and wider, that
have double swinging doors must provide full access to complete interior without center
vertical post.
− Drawers: Sized on a modular basis for interchange to meet varying storage needs, and designed
to be easily removable in field without the use of special tools.
− Case Openings: Rabbeted-like joints all four sides of case opening for hinged doors and two
sides for sliding doors in order to provide dust-resistant case.
− Framed Glazed Doors: Identical in construction, hardware, and installation to solid panel doors.
Design frame glazed doors must be removable for glass replacement.
• Casework Performance Standards:
− Structural performance standards: Casework components must withstand the following minimum
loads without damage to the component or to the casework operation:
 Fixed steel base cabinet unit load capacity: 500 pounds per linear foot
 Suspended cabinet units: 300 pounds
 Drawers in a cabinet: 150 pounds
 Adjustable height tables (four legged): 1,000 pounds
 Hanging wall cases: 300 pounds
 Load capacity for shelves of base units, wall cases, and tall cases: 40 pounds per square foot
 Wall-mounted adjustable shelves: 40 pounds per square foot
 Stainless-steel, wall-hung sinks and scullery sinks specified within this section: 200 pounds
per linear foot
− Metal Finish Performance Standards:
 Abrasion Resistance: Maximum weight loss of 5.5 milligrams per 100 cycles when tested on
a Taber Abrasion Tester E40101 with 1000 gram wheel pressure and Calibrase CS10 wheel
 Hardness: Surface hardness equivalent to 4H or 5H pencil
 Humidity Resistance: Withstand 1,000-hour exposure in saturated humidity at 100°F
 Moisture Resistance:
o No visible effect to the surface finish after boiling water trickled over test panel inclined at
45 degrees for 5 minutes
o No visible effect to the surface finish following 100-hour continuous application of a
water-soaked cellulose sponge, maintained in a wet condition throughout the test period
 Adhesion: Score the finish surface of the test panel with razor blade into 100 squares,
1/16 inch by 1/16 inch, cutting completely through the finish but with minimum penetration of
the substrate, and brush away particles with soft brush; minimum of 95 squares must
maintain their finish
 Salt Spray: Withstand minimum 200-hour salt spray test
• Pegboards and Drying Racks:
− Board: 1-inch-thick clear plexiglass with frosted or etched finish on wall-side face. Bevel all edges
and polish to same finish as outside finished face. Size board as required.
− Pegs: Mixture of black and white polypropylene pegs in 5-inch, 6-1/2-inch, and 8-inch lengths,
with glassware protector base. Base of pegs must be two prong-style for mechanical attachment.
Do not bond pegs to board. Locations of colored pegs are dependent on accent color of adjacent
wall. Final locations of colored pegs as directed by Architect.
− Drain Pan: Provide a stainless-steel drain pan for the full width of peg board with drain at center.
Provide white drain hose with sufficient length to reach adjacent sink.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
132 04 November 2019
• Tops and Working Surfaces:
− General: Provide smooth, clean, exposed tops and edges, in uniform plane free of defects. Make
exposed edges and corners uniformly rounded.
− Top Sizes: Supply tops in maximum practicable lengths, or as indicated in the drawings, but
never less than 30 inches unless otherwise noted on the drawings. Locate the field joints and
design details of the joints only as indicated on final shop drawings.
− Top Thickness: For each type of top and application, maintain 3/4-inch thickness, except as
otherwise indicated, with tolerance not exceeding plus or minus 1/32-inch. Provide front and edge
overhang of 1 inch over the base cabinets, formed with continuous-drip groove on the under
surface, 1/2-inch from the edge, and overhang the cabinet sides by 1/2 inch (no drip grove on
side overhang).
− Molded Epoxy Resin Tops:
 General: Provide factory-molded tops of modified epoxy resin formulation, uniform mixture
throughout full thickness. Color must be from manufacturer’s standard color pallet.
o Except as otherwise indicated, edge condition will be integral with top, with 5/8-inch
coved juncture to top surface. The front edge must be a 1/4-inch bevel.
o Provide marine edge at all sink locations using width of base cabinet below for outer
limits of marine edge for sizing.
o Form smooth and uniform sink cutouts without saw marks and with a 1/8-inch radius at
the top edge. Finish the bottom edge of the sink opening smooth, with the edge broken to
prevent sharpness. Radius corners of the sink cutouts not less than ¾-inch.
 Modular Core Tops: Same material as top. Provide as shown on drawings.
 Reagent Ledges: Same material as top. Provide 6-inch-high by 7-1/2-inch-wide single faced
units and 6-inch-high by 9-inch-wide double faced units. Ledge face must permit installation
of service fixtures and top must be removable for access to service utilities.
 Physical Properties: Provide tops in which the physical properties, when tested in accordance
with standards or procedures referenced below, are as follows:
o Flexural Strength (ASTM D 790-71): 15,000 psi
o Compressive Strength (ASTM D 695-77): 35,000 psi
o Hardness (ASTM D 785~5): Rockwell M,100
o Water Absorption Percentage by Weight (ASTM D 570-77): In 24 hours, 0.02; in 7 days,
0.04; 2-hour boil, 0.04
o Specific Gravity: 1.97
o Tensile Strength: 8,500 psi
 Chemical Resistance: Spot test of following reagents in standard laboratory concentrations,
in contact with finished top for 24 hours, entirely unaffected or slight dulling of finish; glacial
acetic acid, hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, phosphoric acid, sulfuric acid, chromic acid,
ammonium hydroxide, calcium hypochlorite, sodium hydroxide, acetone, amyl acetate, aqua
regia, benzene, butyl alcohol, ethyl acetate, ethyl alcohol, ethyl ether, formaldehyde,
hydrogen peroxide, methyl alcohol, methyl ethyl ketone, kerosene, phenol, silver nitrate,
trichloroethylene, xylene, zinc chloride.
 Workmanship: Cast surfaces very smooth, with factory cut-outs for sinks and drip grooves.
Plain butt type joints assembled with epoxy adhesive and pre-fitted, concealed metal spline.
− Stainless-Steel Tops:
 General: Provide 14-gauge stainless-steel sheet, American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI)
Type 316L throughout, with No. 4 satin finish. Weld shop joints, grind smooth and polish to
become practically invisible at all welded connection. Provide hair-line butt jointed field joints,
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 133
mechanically bolted through continuous channels welded to underside at edges. Keep field
jointing to a minimum. Apply reinforcing channels to underside of top where necessary to
ensure rigidity without deflection.
o Extend top down to provide a 1-inch thickness and 1/2-inch return flange under the
frame. Sound-deaden entire under-surface with heavy build mastic coating.
o Form backsplash must be coved to and integral with top surface.
o Provide a raised marine edge around perimeter of all tops. Provide level top except,
where pitch is indicated, pitch top surface two-ways to bowl to provide adequate drainage
without channeling or grooving.
o Where stainless-steel sinks occur in stainless-steel tops, factory assemble sinks and tops
into one integral unit with ground and polished welds.
− Grommets: Provide where identified on casework drawings
 Material: Flame-resistant ABS plastic
 Shape: Oval
 Color: Black
− Task Light: Provide one light unit at lowest adjustable shelf per each 60-inch-wide by 30-inchdeep
section of casework on all island benches.
• Casework Installation:
− Installation:
 Install plumb, level, true and straight with no distortions. Shim as required, using concealed
shims. Where laboratory casework abuts other finished work, scribe and apply filler strips for
accurate fit with fasteners concealed where practical.
 Install casework with uniform joint widths between adjacent work, with width of joint matching
as closely as possible, width of joint between adjoining doors, drawers, and other elements
within each casework unit.
− Base Cabinets:
 Set cabinets straight, plumb, and level. Adjust sub-tops within 1/16-inch of a single plane.
Fasten each individual cabinet to floor at toe space, with fasteners spaced 24 inches on
center. Bolt continuous cabinets together. Secure individual cabinets with not less than two
fasteners into floor, where they do not adjoin other cabinets.
 Where required, assemble units into one integral unit with joints flush, tight, and uniform.
Align similar adjoining doors and drawers to a tolerance of 1/16-inch.
− Wall Cabinets:
 Securely fasten to solid supporting material, not plaster, lath, or wallboard. Anchor, adjust,
and align wall cabinets as specified for base cabinets.
 Reinforcement of stud walls to support wall-mounted cabinets will be done during wall
erection by trade involved, but responsibility for accurate location and sizing of reinforcement
is part of this work.
− Adjust casework and hardware so that doors and drawers operate smoothly without warp or bind.
Lubricate operating hardware as recommended by manufacturer.
• Installation of Tops:
− Field Jointing: Where practicable, make in same manner as factory jointing using dowels, splines,
adhesives, and fasteners recommended by manufacturer. There will be no joints in stainless-steel
countertops under 8 feet in length. Locate field joints as shown on accepted shop drawings,
factory prepared so there is no job site processing of top and edge surfaces.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
134 04 November 2019
− Fastenings:
 For epoxy tops, secure to cabinets with epoxy cement applied at each corner and along
perimeter edges of not more than 48 inches on center.
 For other types of top, use concealed clamping devices for field joints, located within 6 inches
of front, at back edges and at intervals not exceeding 24 inches. Tighten in accordance with
manufacturer's instructions to exert a constant, heavy clamping pressure at joints. Secure to
cabinets with “Z”-type fasteners or equivalent, using two or more fasteners at each front, end,
and back.
− Workmanship: Abut top and edge surfaces in one true plane, with internal supports placed to
prevent any deflection. Provide flush hairline joints in top units using clamping devices. At epoxy
material joints, use manufacturer's recommended adhesives and holding devices to provide
joint widths not more than 1/16-inch wide at any location, completely filled and flush with
abutting edges.
 Where necessary to penetrate tops with fasteners, countersink heads approximately 1/8-inch
and plug hole flush with material equal in chemical resistance, color, hardness, and texture to
top surface.
 After installation, carefully dress joints smooth, remove any surface scratches, clean and
polish entire surface.
 Provide holes and cutouts as required for mechanical and electrical service fixtures.
 Provide scribe moldings for closures at junctures of top, curb and splash with walls as
recommended by manufacturer for materials involved. Use chemical-resistant, permanentelastic
sealing compound where recommended by manufacturer.
 The edge condition will be square cut for butt joint to adjacent tops. The front edge must be a
1/4-inch bevel.
12 35 55 Laboratory Sinks and Fixtures
• Reference Standards:
All casework, work surface and service fixture construction and performance characteristics must be
in full compliance with SEFA standards. At the Director’s request, independent, third-party testing
must be submitted validating compliance and adheres to the architectural specifications.
− SEFA 2.3, Installation of Scientific Laboratory Furniture and Equipment
− SEFA 3, Work Surfaces
− SEFA 7, Laboratory and Hospital Fixtures
− SEFA 8, Laboratory Furniture
• Quality Assurance:
− Single Source Responsibility: Provide laboratory casework with tops, sinks, and service fixtures,
manufactured, or furnished by a single laboratory casework company for single responsibility.
Laboratory fume hoods specified herein must be fully integrated with casework as shown on
drawings and should be furnished by the same laboratory casework company.
− Chemical and Physical Resistance of Finish:
 General: Submit an independent testing laboratory report certifying that the exterior finish of
laboratory casework is capable of withstanding following tests with no change, or slight
change of gloss, slight discoloration, or slight temporary softening of film with no loss of
adhesion and no loss of film protection.
 Acids: Not less than 5 drops (0.25 cc) applied to finish surface, covered with watch glass for
60 minutes, then washed and dried.
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 135
• Sinks:
− General: Provide with sink outlet, strainer, tailpiece, and adapter as required for connection to lab
waste system, and an overflow.
 Sizes: As indicated or manufacturer's closest stock size of equal or greater volume, as
acceptable to the Architect.
 Outlets: 1-1/2-inch diameter, 6-inch minimum length, fabricated of silicon iron, cast epoxy
resin, stainless-steel, glass, or lead; of same material as sink wherever possible, or as
otherwise acceptable to the Architect.
− Overflows: Furnish for sinks, except cup sinks, of standard beehive or open top type with
separate strainer; height 2 inches less than sink depth; of same material as sink.
− Molded Epoxy Resin Sinks: Non-glare black, molded in one piece with surfaces smooth, corners
coved and bottom sloped to outlet. Sinks will be undermounted to the countertop. Minimum
physical properties and chemical resistance as specified for molded epoxy resin tops; thickness,
1/2-inch minimum.
− Stainless-Steel Sinks: 16-gauge, Type 316L (except Type 304 where indicated), with No. 4 satin
finish, unless otherwise indicated. Fabricate with horizontal and vertical corners rounded and
coved to at least 5/8-inch radius. Slope sink bottoms to pitch to outlet. Provide double wall
construction for sink partitions with top edge rounded to at least 1/2-inch diameter. Continuous
butt weld joints and provide factory punching for fixtures.
 When stainless-steel sinks are part of stainless-steel tops, weld the sink units to the tops and
finish to produce an integral unit with an invisible joint line.
 Where stainless-steel sinks are required in tops other than stainless steel, provide undermounted
type sinks.
• Mechanical Service Fixtures:
− Single Source Responsibility: Furnish mechanical service fixtures by one manufacturer for the
entire project (that is, single manufacturer for mechanical service fixtures specified as work of this
Section).
− Service Fixtures: Provide units complete with washers, locknuts, unions, nipples, and other
accessories for positive mounting to supporting laboratory units. Include wall and deck flanges,
escutcheons, handle extension rods, remote valves, and similar items required. Fabricate units to
withstand test pressure of 100 psi air under water; except test high pressure fixtures for rare,
exotic and special gases to withstand freon gas test pressure of 300 psi, whether remotely
controlled or manually operated.
− Material and Finish, General: Fabricate service fixtures from cast or forged red brass containing a
minimum of 85% copper. Sandblast fixtures smooth, provide plastic coating as indicated.
− Epoxy Coating: Apply acid- and solvent-resistant colored epoxy coating directly to the
sandblasted metal surface. Spray apply coating and bake three times to provide a minimum
coating thickness in the range 2.0 to 3.0 mils. Finish must be silver metallic. Test finish coats
as follows:
Suspend samples in a container of 6 ft3 capacity, approximately 12 inches above open beakers,
each containing 199 cc of 70% nitric acid, 94% sulfuric acid, and 37% hydrochloric acid,
respectively. After exposure to these fumes for 150 hours, the finish must show no rupture,
though slight discoloration or possible softening is permissible.
− Service Outlets Identification: Provide colored plastic index discs with embossed identification
letters at each service fixture handle or knob. Secure discs to fixture handles to be virtually
tamperproof. Color-code discs as described in Table 12-1.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
136 04 November 2019
Table 12-1. Service Outlet Color Codes
Service Color Code Letter Color
Vacuum Yellow VAC Black
Compressed air Orange AIR Black
Gas Blue GAS White
Carbon dioxide Pink CO2 Black
Oxygen Light Green OXY Black
Hot water Red HW White
Cold water Green CW White
Reverse osmosis (RO) water White RO Black
Air Cylinder Orange CYCL-AIR Black
Compressed Air Orange CA Black
Nitrogen (Cylinder) Brown NC White
Nitrogen Brown NIT White
Special Gas Lt. Blue SG Black
Argon Violet AR White
Deionized Water White DI Black
Helium Black HE Black
− Ball Valve Hose Cocks: Laboratory ball valves must have a forged brass valve body, a removable
serrated hose end and a forged brass lever-type handle with a full-view color-coded index disc.
Valves must have a floating chrome plated brass ball and molded Teflon® seals. Valves must be
certified by CSA for use with natural gas under ANSI Z21.15. Valves must be individually tested
at 125 psi air pressure and must be rated for use at working air pressures up to 75 psi.
− Needle Valves: Provide needle valves (if any required) with a forged brass body, a removable
serrated hose end, and a forged brass valve body with a full-view color-coded screw-on-type
index disc. Provide stainless-steel replaceable valve seat and a precision stainless-steel
replaceable floating cone held in place by a stainless-steel clip, with lateral movement of the cone
not to exceed 0.15-inch. Design valve bonnet so that the valve may be repacked while under
pressure. Test needle valves individually under water, at 100 psi. The maximum working pressure
for needle valves must be 80 psi.
 Handles: Provide four-arm forged brass handles for valves, stops, faucets, remote controls,
and cocks, except for ground key cocks, and micro-adjustable needle cocks (if any). Provide
6-inch wrist blade handles at "accessible" work stations, as required.
 Water Fittings: Provide water fittings with a renewable unit containing all operating parts
which are subject to wear. The renewable unit must contain an integral volume control
device. Design faucets to be readily convertible from compression to self-closing, without
disturbing the faucet body proper.
o Provide vacuum breakers on all water fixtures (hot water, chilled water, and DI water).
o Provide aerator or serrated hole end on all mixing faucets.
o Faucets must be readily convertible from four-arm handle to lever handle through
replacement of handle and internal unit without affecting the faucet body.
− Gooseneck Type Outlets: Provide gooseneck outlets, where indicated, with a separate brazed
coupling to provide a full thread attachment of anti-splash, serrated tip or filter pump fittings.
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 137
 Provide goosenecks with separate 3/8-inch iron pipe size coupling securely braced to the
gooseneck to provide full thread for attachment of anti-splash outlet fittings, serrated tips, and
filter pumps.
 Provide swing goosenecks with 1/8-inch-thick by 5/16-inch-high Teflon asbestos heavy duty
swing packings; "O" rings in swing joints will not be permitted.
 Design water faucets and valves to be readily convertible to needle valves with stainlesssteel
or monel replaceable seat and floating needle cone.
 Fabricate needle valves of renewable unit construction with integral control device for
volume control.
 Construct exterior packing nut and packing gland at bonnet of valve so that valve can be
easily repacked under pressure.
 Seal unit in valve body with special composition gasket; metal-to-metal or ground joint type of
sealing will not be acceptable.
− Remote Control Valves: Provide all valves for remote control use as previously specified.
− Tank Nipples: Provide tank nipples with locking nut and washer for all fixtures where fittings are
anchored to casework.
− RO/DI Water Fixtures: All polypropylene with nylon handle, compression control valve, and
colored plastic index disc include mounting shank.
• Electrical Service Fixtures:
− Service Fixtures: Where electrical service is required to be mounted in or on laboratory casework,
provide units complete with metal housing or box; necessary receptacles, terminals, switches,
pilot lights, device plates; electrical pedestals; and fittings and gaskets required for mounting on
casework; all fixtures UL labeled.
− Recessed Type Fixtures: Galvanized steel outlet box, size as required complete with cover plate
and receptacles or other devices as indicated.
− Cover Plates: Stainless steel, Type 302, satin finish, with formed beveled edges.
− Receptacles: Furnish alternating current (AC) receptacles for AC circuits, as indicated. Furnish
direct current (DC) receptacles and terminal and other special outlets as indicated on the
drawings.
− Switches: Furnish single pole, double pole, or three-way switches, as required, rated 120-277
VAC, and in amperage capacities to suit units served. Furnish in color to match receptacles.
 Provide pilot lights adjacent to toggle switch, where noted.
 Furnish thermal overload switches of single pole or double pole, as required, with maximum
overcurrent trip setting to suit particular motor controlled.
 Furnish DC switches, single pole or double pole, as required, rated 125-250V DC, and in
amperage capacities to suit the units served.
12 35 58 Overhead Service Carriers
Overhead Service Carrier
• Coordinate with standards of Division 22, Plumbing, and Division 26, Electrical, for installation of
electrical, data, plumbing and telephone devices.
• Supports must be 1 5/8-inch Unistrut structure for both support of carrier and mounting of necessary
devices. Provide Unistrut structure as shown on drawings. Unistrut must be bolted to the slab above
using post bases and/or with steel angles with appropriate support. Provide structure to support
400 pounds per linear foot. Provide diagonal bracing above the ceiling plane to resist a 100-poundper-
linear-foot force applied horizontally at the base of the assembly in any direction.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
138 04 November 2019
• Power and Tel/Data Raceway, as specified under Division 26, Electrical:
− Style: 2 Channel raceway
− Color: Anodized Aluminum
• Manifold “Gas Conduit” Piping: Pneumadyne or equal, in-line manifold with 3/8-inch NPT threaded
connections to match service fittings:
− Size: 1-1/4-inch by 1-1/4-inch outside dimension of manifold unit
− Material: Extruded aluminum, copper and/or stainless steel as required by gas service at specific
location
Accessories
• Provide closure strips, end caps, frame caps, and all necessary pieces to provide a smooth, finished
appearance
Support Assembly Finish
• Pretreatment: After assembly, clean surfaces of grease, dirt, oil, flux, and other foreign matter by
physical and chemical means. Treat entire unit with metallic phosphate process leaving surfaces with
uniform, fine-grained, crystalline phosphate coating providing excellent bond for subsequent finish.
• Top Coats: One coat high-bake primer followed by one or more coats of high-bake, chemicalresistant
enamel, to provide a hard and smooth, satin luster finish, applied to treated surfaces.
• All surfaces must be coated.
• Color must be selected by the Architect from the manufacturer’s complete line of standard finishes.
Provide closure metal pieces to match casework metal in construction and finish.
12 36 61 Solid Surfacing Countertops
Countertops must be constructed of homogenous filled plastic resin or Quartz Agglomerate complying
with ICPA SS-1 depending upon direction of the Government. Fabricate countertops according to the
manufacturer’s written instructions and the AWI/Architectural Woodwork Manufacturers Association of
Canada’s Architectural Woodwork Standards.
Grade must be custom fabricated with a minimum number of joints for joining in the field. If integral sinks
are required, comply with CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124.
Material(s) must be minimum of 1/2-inch thick with front and side edges built up of same material to
provide a 1-inch profile. Provide underlayment or stiffener struts as required. Colors will vary based on the
building type and room installed. Color(s) and/or pattern(s) will be at the direction of the Government and
as selected from the manufacturer’s full range. Assume multiple colors within the same building or
residential unit.
Front edge of countertops must be straight, slightly eased at top. Coordinate all cutouts for sinks, faucets
and other through counter accessories. Perform all cutouts in the shop using templates from fixture
manufacturers.
Bond all joints and install all splashes with adhesive according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Fasten all countertops by screwing through corner blocks of base units into underside of countertop.
Predrill holes as recommended by manufacturer. Apply sealant to all gaps at walls. Refer to Division 7,
Thermal and Moisture Protection, for sealant information.
DIVISION 12 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 139
12 51 00 Office Furniture
To address common musculoskeletal disorders experienced in workplace environments and in support of
UFC 3-120-10, Interior Design, designers and furniture specifiers must incorporate basic ergonomic
workstation furnishings for desk- and standing-based workstations.
For All Spaces:
Desktop Computer-Based Workstations: All desktop computer monitors must be adjustable by height
and horizontal distance from the user by one or more of the following:
• Monitors with built-in height adjustment
• Height-adjustable stands
• Mounted, adjustable arms that hold primary or additional screens
Laptop Computer-Based Workstations: All laptop screens must be adjustable by height and horizontal
distance from the user by a combination of the following:
• Height-adjustable stands used to raise the laptop screen paired with an external keyboard and mouse
that are placed on the work surface.
• Additional monitors provided with one of the following adjustability features:
− Built-in height adjustment
− Height-adjustable stands
− Mounted, adjustable arms that hold primary or additional screens
For at least 25% of seated-height workstations, employees must have the ability to alternate between
sitting or standing through one of the following:
• Adjustable height sit-to-stand desks
• Desktop height-adjustment stands
All workstations in which employees are regularly required to stand for 50% or more of their working
hours must include at least 4 inches of recessed toe space and one of the following:
• A footrest or footrail to allow employees to alternate resting feet or a seat or leaning chair that allows
occupants to alternate between standing and sitting or leaning
• Antifatigue mats or cushions that are also antislip and antitrip
The integration of active workstations can further reduce sedentary behaviors in the workplace. Designers
and furniture specifiers should coordinate with the Tyndall AFB PMO to include the following types of
dynamic workstations for at least 5% of workstations:
• Treadmill desk
• Bicycle desk
• Portable furnishings (such as an under-desk stepper machine or a balance board)
12 52 00 Seating
In support of UFC 3-120-10, Interior Design, ensure all seating at workstations for employees meets the
following ergonomic adjustability standards in compliance with the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society (HFES) 100-2007 standard or BIFMA G1-2013 guidelines:
• Chair height
• Seat depth
• One additional adjustability standard:
− Seat angle
− Backrest angle
− Arm rests
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 12
140 04 November 2019
12 60 00 MULTIPLE SEATING
12 61 00 Fixed Audience Seating
Provide pedestal-mounted molded plastic chairs with upholstered inserts where shown on plans. End
panels must be molded plastic to match seat construction. Fabric and padding must be Class 1 in
accordance with Department of Commerce Commercial Standards 191 or 16 CFR 1610 tested in
accordance with California Technical Bulletin 117 – 2000.
Molded plastic must be HDPE or polypropylene blow or injection molded with surface that is mar- and
dent-resistant. Strength and durability of performance of chairs and components must pass BIFMA X5.4.
Fabric must be 18-ounce-per-linear-yard 100% nylon material with flame-retardant treatment.
Fabric, plastic, and metal colors must be as selected by the Government from the manufacturer’s full
range of standard colors.
Provide row lettering and chair numbering system at all seats.
Provide removable chairs equal to 5% of the seating for wheelchairs.
DIVISION 13 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 141
DIVISION 13 SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 13 work include the following:
• All special construction not explicitly defined must be designed for the Tyndall AFB wind speed
requirements (USAF, 2019b).
• Special construction must be designed and detailed to meet all requirements of the High-Velocity
Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC for the applicable sections related to their
material types.
13 20 00 SPECIAL PURPOSE ROOMS
13 21 00 Controlled Environmental Rooms
• Chamber Construction:
− Environmental Room sizes are shown on drawings.
− Room height: 9-foot-6-inch nominal overall height with 7-foot-2-inch minimum interior ceiling
height
− Type of ceiling support: Self-supporting. Suspension for the building structure is not permitted.
− Door type: Out-swing, 36-inch by 78-inch finished matching wall panels. 34-inch-wide doors will
not be accepted.
− Door accessories for cold room:
 Nominal 14-inch by 23-inch observation window with electrically heated frame
 Tempered glass
 Stainless-steel push-plate mounted on the inside face of the door
• Insulation:
− Insulation must be rigid urethane foam. Overall thickness must be 4 inches minus metal skins.
− All panels must be a UL Classified Building unit, with a flame spread rating of 25 or less and each
panel must display the UL label for this rating.
− All panel components must conform to the reduced chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) content regulations
mandated as part of the Montreal Protocol and must bear a label conspicuously affixed to each
component part.
− Panels must conform to the requirements of the locally recognized building code.
• Wall and Ceiling Construction:
− Environmental Rooms must be prefabricated, all metal clad, panelized constructed and designed
for easy and accurate field assembly. Interior and exterior surfaces, except floor component, must
be 24-gauge galvanized steel. Interior must be smooth and the exterior must be embossed.
− Sections must be made without internal wood or metal structural members with 100% of each
section, exclusive of metal skins, being urethane insulation. Section edges must have tongue and
groves foamed-in-place with gaskets on each edge to assure airtight joints. Provide panel widths
required to assure the desired dimensions illustrated in the drawings.
− To assure perfect alignment and maximum strength, 90-degree angled panels must be provided
for each corner. The exterior horizontal dimension of each side of this corner must be 12 inches.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 13
142 04 November 2019
• Pressure Relief Port:
− A pressure relief port must be provided for all Environmental Rooms operating at a temperature
of -17.8°C (0°F) or lower. A relief port must be provided to equalize the difference in exterior and
interior pressure caused by sudden temperature changes due to opening doors, loading product
and the defrosting of coils. The relief port must be located in a side panel, away from obstructions
so that air can freely move into or out of the Environmental Room. Electrical service required is
120VAC and must be furnished and installed (including all inter connecting wiring and conduit)
under this section.
• Floor Covering: All Environmental Rooms must be provided with finished floor by others.
• Exterior and Interior Metal Skin Finish: Two-coat baked-on white polyester enamel finish.
• Standard Hinged Entrance Doors:
− The door must be an in-fitting flush-mounted type. Construction of door frame must be as stated
in paragraph on wall construction. Reinforced, stainless-steel frame of not less than 12-gauge
thickness around entire perimeter of the door opening to prevent racking and twisting. Sill plates
must include safety walk strips.
− Opening size: 36 inches wide by 78 inches high or as indicated in door schedule
− All hardware must be made of brushed aluminum or chrome finished. Refer to door hardware
schedule for special inclusions related to door hardwire devices and/or necessary fabrication of
panels to provide access to such devices installed by others.
− Each door must have three hinges, self-closing and spring loaded type with stainless-steel pin
and Delrin cam type bearing and positive action hydraulic type door closer. Door exterior must
have a "break-away" type latch handle and a push plate on the interior.
− External cylinder type lock. Coordinate cylinder and key with Director to match project. It must
include an inside safety release handle to prevent anyone from being locked inside.
− A thermoplastic gasket with magnetic steel core must be mounted on top edge and along both
sides of the door. The bottom of the door must contain a wiper gasket.
− Each door must have heaters to prevent condensation and frost formation.
− Provide and display a placard on the interior of door cap to remind users of the potential hazard
caused by spilled water on the floor.
− All door panels must conform to locally recognized electrical and building code.
− Vision Panel. A nominal 14 inches wide by 23 inches high vision panel must be provided in all
doors. It will consist of three panes of glass with sealed air spaces between them. The window
must be supplied with a heater and must be removable for replacement.
− Light switch with a pilot light mounted on the outside of the unit.
• Controls and Instruments:
− Instruments, controls, and major electrical components must be installed in a welded and
polished stainless-steel control center, surfaced-mounted at the location indicated on the
drawings. Provide operational features listed below:
 Color touch screen operator interface pass code controlled access to view or change all
operator adjustable parameters. All operating parameters for environmental control, defrost,
and alarm processing must be entered and displayed digitally on the color screen.
 Room performance must be displayed in text and graphic modes with minimum of 7 days of
historical trend line indication of environmental performance.
 Wire control panel to provide for a single point power connection for all equipment except
compressor. Provide separate over current protection, using circuits, for all circuits necessary
for the operation of control panel connected equipment and fixtures.
DIVISION 13 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 143
 Wiring from the control panel must extend from the top of the control enclosure within an
anodized aluminum raceway with removable cover. Extend raceway to a point above the
adjacent ceiling or to another unexposed location.
 Control system must provide for network based communications with a remote computer via
Ethernet, allowing the operator to view and change room performance and setup.
Manufacturer must have available a companion software product offering that provides
variable time based data logging of room performance, remote set point adjustment, and
security controlled access.
 Control panel must have no visible hinges or mounting hardware on its exterior. Provide
hinged front service door, gasketed to prevent entry of dust. Door must have a key lock to
prevent unauthorized access to electrical components. Maximum allowable control panel
depth is 6 inches.
 Control system must retain all operating data and parameter settings during power
interruption.
 Control system must be PLC based, allowing for the addition or deletion of control functions
without modification of the existing hardwired components. System must provide capability to
change or update the operating program or unit configuration in the field without the use of
cables or computers, of the need for a specially trained technician.
− Safety and Quality Assurance:
 Complete control panel assembly must be tested and certified by a Nationally Recognized
Testing Laboratory to be in accordance with NFPA 70 and UL508A. A certified label from the
testing agency must be applied to each panel.
 Provide as-built documentation for key control panel that details the following:
o Scaled illustration of the physical component layout of the control panel face and interior
with designations for each component which are common to all other documentation.
Terminals on each component must be indicated and the conductor connected to each
terminal documented on the drawing.
o Schematic of control system in ladder-type format, using Institute of Electrical And
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Standard 315-1975 (reaffirmed 1993) symbols and
abbreviations, and text indicating the basic function of each logical portion of the
schematic.
− Control System Components and Functions:
 Temperature Control: Regulation of room temperature must be integrated into the PLC. All
heating and cooling functions must be controlled by this device, with display and edit of all
setup and operating parameters available on the touch screen display. Manufacturer must
deliver the system completely programmed, set up, and tuned for the operation at the
specified temperatures.
o Primary temperature sensors must be a Resistance Temperature Detector mounted in a
protective stainless-steel sheath. A backup temperature sensor must be provided, and
operational features that will automatically change control loop input to the backup sensor
when a failure is detected.
o Temperature control modes must include all combinations of Proportional Integral
Derivative as well as simple On/Off output control. Selection of operating mode must be
made with the touch screen display.
 Relative Humidity Control: Relative humidity control and display must be provided on all
rooms with relative humidity performance specified for the project. Regulation of room
humidity must be integrated into the PLC. All humidifying and dehumidifying functions must
be controlled by this device, with display or edit to all setup and operational parameters
available on the touch screen display. Manufacturer must deliver the system completely
programmed, setup, and tuned for operation at the specified conditions.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 13
144 04 November 2019
o Relative humidity sensor must be thin film capacitance measuring type with protective
housing and filter to reduce contamination of the sensor element by surrounding
environment. Sensor accuracy must be ±3% over a 0−90% relative humidity range.
o Operator must be provided the capability to enable or disable humidification or
dehumidification functions using the touch screen display. System must automatically
shut down appropriate equipment when it is not needed.
 Alarms: All rooms must have adjustable high and low alarms for temperature. Rooms with
relative humidity control must be provided with alarms for relative humidity. All alarm items
must have the features and functions described below:
o The touch screen display must allow digital edit and display of the alarm setpoint and
time delay.
o Plain English text message must annunciate the occurrence of each alarm. Each alarm
message must be different from all others. Message must remain on the touch scene
display until operator acknowledges alarm.
o Audio annunciation of an alarm occurrence by piezo-electric device must provide a
warble tone with variable sound level.
o An adjustable time delay that must elapse before alarm response or annunciation is
executed. This must be used to reduce the occurrence of nuisance alarms and allow
alarm setpoints to be closer to the actual room operating condition.
o Visual indication of alarm by flashing indicator on the touch screen display. Indicator must
appear to alert the operator of an alarm condition and remain visible until all alarms are
cleared. Audio silence function must not affect indicator status.
o A reset function must be provided on the touch screen display to allow the operator to
immediately clear and reset all alarms.
 Compressor Alarm: All rooms must be provided with a compressor failure to operate and
short cycle alarms. This alarm must have all the features described herein for temperature
alarms, but must not require an adjustable setpoint on the touch screen display. Manufacturer
must preset this alarm.
 Audio Silence: Provide an audio silence/alarm silence feature, which can be activated by the
operator on the touch screen display, that includes all the functions and features described
herein. Regardless of the audio silence method selected, occurrences of a new alarm
condition will cause the audio alarm to sound. Each time the audio alarm sounds, the
operator may specify a different silence method of duration. Silence options are as follows:
o Audio is silenced until the occurrence of the next alarm.
o Audio is silenced, but will sound again when all alarm conditions clear to alert the
operator that conditions have returned to the normal range. Operator must then
acknowledge the audio ring back at the control panel to silence it.
o Audio is silenced for a period of time specified by the operator at the time the silence
button is pressed. The maximum silence time is 60 minutes and is digitally set in one
minute increments on the touch screen display.
 Remote Alarm Relay Contacts: Dry alarm contacts suitable for connection to remote alarm
monitors must transfer upon activation of selected alarms. Control system must be provided
with two single-pole double throw relays that are separately programmable to specify which
alarm events will trigger their transfer. Remote alarm contacts must automatically reset when
all alarms are cleared.
 Safety Limit Controls: Two layers of safety limit controls must be provided, referred to
herein as primary and secondary layers. Each layer must have a high and low temperature
limit with a separate response action time delay for each defined temperature limit.
DIVISION 13 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 145
o Primary layer must be implemented as part of the main logic controller, with all the
features of alarms described previously in this section. This must include, but not be
limited to, time delay before alarm response is executed, plain English text message
indicating the cause of the alarm, audio annunciation and silencing, and immediate
resetting capability. An additional feature includes the ability to field select specific heat
producing or cooling items that will be de-energized upon the occurrence of the primary
limit safety alarm, preventing further heating or cooling of the room. When temperature
returns to within the normal range, the affected equipment will automatically restart.
o Secondary layer must consist of hardwired limit control devices separate from the PLC
and all other alarm and control devices. Each must have its own sensor and switching
devices, independent from those used for environmental control. Limit control relays and
contactors must not be used for any other function within the control system. Secondary
layer limit control alarm annunciation must have the same features as primary alarms
described above. Provide functions and features as follows:
 High Limit: In the event of a high temperature limit condition, the limit control will
de-energize all devices loaded on the control panel power circuit except the controls.
Additionally, the limit control circuit must have a normally open contact wired in series
with the compressor contactor control signal to provide immediate and direct
shutdown of the compressor. The use of valves and pressure controls for compressor
safety shutdown must not be permitted. When temperature returns to the normal
range the system must automatically reset. Secondary high limit must be factory set
and is not adjustable.
 Low Limit: In the event of a low temperature limit condition, the safety control will
directly open the compressor contactor. Limit control circuit must have a normally
open contact wired in series with the compressor contactor control signal. Systems
that rely on low pressure switch action to shut down the compressor will not be
accepted. When temperature returns to the normal range the system must
automatically reset. Low limit setpoint is digitally adjustable. Low limit must not be
provided on rooms with maximum specified operating temperature less than +1°C.
 Recorder: Furnish and install an electronic recording device with 10-inch-diameter circular
chart on each room. Provide 100 preprinted charts and a fiber-tipped pen with each
instrument. Chart rotation time must be 7 days. Input devices must be of the same type and
arrangement as device used for input to main control of the parameter being recorded.
o Electronic Temperature Recorder: Furnish and install electronic temperature recorder
on all rooms. Instrument must have a chart range of -40°C to +60°C. Chart calibration
and divisions must be shown in degrees Celsius.
 Refrigeration System Control (Provided only where two cooling systems are indicated on
the drawings): Automatically alternate the operation of the cooling systems on each room to
provide for one active system and one backup system. Normal alternation must be time
based, with the run time coordinated with defrost cycles, to allow defrosting of backup units
only. Upon occurrence of a temperature alarm or compressor alarm, the active system must
shut down and the backup must begin to operate and the normal alternation schedule of the
units must be suspended until the operator acknowledges the failure at the control panel.
Interlock defrosting of units so that only backup units are defrosted. Detected failure of both
compressors, or a recurrence of a temperature alarm, must institute parallel operation of both
cooling systems until all alarms are reset by the operator.
 Defrost Control: Defrost cycle capability must be provided on all rooms. All defrost control
parameters and selections can be displayed and edited on the touch screen display. Control
system must provide the following minimum defrost functionality:
o Defrost activity will be automatically enabled or disabled depending upon whether the
cooling system will require defrosting for the selected operating conditions.
o Operator may select between two defrost initiation modes:
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 13
146 04 November 2019
 Fixed time interval mode provides for defrost cycles at regular time intervals. Time is
adjustable in minute increments on the touch screen display.
 Energy-saving adaptive defrost mode allows the controller to automatically adjust the
defrost activity to match the room usage.
o Operator can manually initiate or terminate a defrost cycle at the touch screen.
o Defrost cycle must automatically terminate based upon the following conditions:
 Room temperature has increased the maximum number of degrees specified by the
operator.
 Evaporator coil temperature has increased to a specified temperature.
 Defrost heating has been active for a maximum specified time period.
o Evaporator coil must be re-cooled at the end of the defrost cycle prior to restart of fan.
One of two required logic conditions listed below must be met before the fan will restart.
All of the described parameters are operator adjustable using the touch screen display.
 Evaporator must cool to an operator specified temperature.
 If evaporator has not sufficiently cooled within a specified time period, the fan will
restart in order to eliminate the possibility of refrigerant liquid flood back to the
compressor.
 Startup Control: Control system must provide functions which allow the room to be
automatically restarted after a power interruption.
o Equipment startup must be delayed by a preset adjustable time period specified by the
operator using the touch screen display.
o All alarm activity except hardwired safety limit controls can be disabled for an adjustable
preset time period after power up to allow the restarted room to achieve its setpoint
conditions without alarming or shutting down due to alarm response activity. The time
period is adjusted on the touch screen display and a visual indicator on the display will
alert the operator while the inhibit function is active.
 Alarm and Setpoint Logging: Control system must internally record a time and date
stamped record of each alarm occurrence and each operating parameter change.
o The log of the most recent ten alarms must be displayed on the touch screen when
requested by the operator. If other than plain text messages are used to describe the
alarm log information, provide help screens that will enable the operator to interpret
the data.
o The log of the most recent ten operating parameter changes must be displayed on the
touch screen when requested by the operator. If other than plain text messages are used
to describe the logged information, provide help screens that will enable the operator to
interpret the data. Logged parameter changes must include all environmental, alarm, and
defrost parameters.
 Environmental Condition Profiling: Provide capability to have 200 steps of operator
programmable changes to the room environmental conditions. Minimum profiling capabilities
required include the following:
o Each step must consist of settings for temperature, humidity, and the desired on/off state
of eight output devices. Additionally, a time value and additional command options can
be entered.
o Operator may group portions of the 200 provided steps into different programs that can
be run separately or together.
o Time values can be real time or elapsed time, and both timing systems can be used in
the same program.
DIVISION 13 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 147
• Mechanical Design: Energy-efficiency measures must be focused on maintainability and in
compliance with regulatory standards governing any biological and/or chemical research being done
within the facility based on current codes at the time of the design. Operationally, the facility must
maintain occupant/operator safety first, environment second, and research last.
− Refrigeration System: The refrigeration system must be an integral part of the control and
conditioning system. All piping and wiring between remote components and rooms must be
installed by the manufacturer. The preferred system type for refrigerated rooms is described
below. Other options may be acceptable provided they are appropriate for a lab environment but
must be approved by Tyndall prior to designing an alternative system type.
 System must use Type R134a refrigerant.
 System must incorporate industrial type semi hermetic compressor, operating continuously.
System must consist of, but not be limited to, compressor, receiver, water cooled condenser,
evaporator, moisture indicating sight glass, liquid filter-drier, crankcase pressure regulator,
suction accumulator, suction line filter, expansion valve, condenser pressure regulator,
manual shut-off valves and all interconnecting piping, insulation, and wiring.
 Condensing units must be provided with automatic reset high- and low-pressure controls.
− Ceiling Conditioning Unit: The air in the room must be conditioned by one or more ceilingmounted
conditioning units. Each must contain all interior cooling, heating, and air moving
equipment within a housing fabricated of aluminum. Service to the internal components must be
via removable panels on the housing. The bottom of the housing must serve as a condensate
drain pan. The conditioning unit must be completely pre-assembled, and tested prior to shipment.
 Air movers must be aluminum bladed fans with permanently lubricated motors.
 Evaporator coil must be fabricated of copper tubes and aluminum fins.
 Condensate drain pan must be heated on all units with operating temperature range
extending below 0°C.
− Piping:
 Refrigerant Piping: Refrigerant piping must be hard-drawn copper with soldered joints. Use
only cleaned and capped pipe lengths specifically manufactured for refrigerant duty.
 Insulation: Closed-cell flexible foam plastic, "Armaflex,” or equal. The material must be
tubular in form and sized properly for the pipe being insulated. Joints must be thoroughly
bonded using the adhesive recommended by the insulation manufacturer. Insulation installed
outdoors must be coated with original manufacturer’s recommended material in accordance
with approved procedures. Insulation must meet all applicable fire and smoke requirements.
Insulate hot gas bypass line from condensing unit to evaporator. Insulate other lines
wherever condensation may form on the piping.
 Condensate Drain Piping: Rooms with operating conditions above 0°C must have
condensate drain lines fabricated of PVC. All other rooms must have copper drain lines with
heat tracing and insulation applied to prevent freezing of the line and condensation on the
exterior of the piping.
 Dehumidification: Dehumidification must be accomplished using the controlled environment
room refrigeration system. Desiccant-based dehumidifiers must not be employed on this
project.
• Lighting:
− Cold Storage Rooms: Lighting systems must use cool white LED-type lamps. LED modules and
drivers must be enclosed in vapor-proof fixtures. The fixtures must be UL approved and rated to
operate at temperatures as low as -20°C. Light fixtures must be surface-mounted to the ceiling
and be provided in sufficient quantity for minimum intensities of 70 to 80 foot-candles, 36 inches
above the finished floor in each walk-in compartment.
− Environmental Rooms: Provide LED lighting fixtures, gasketed and vapor-proof, with doormounted
acrylic lenses in enough quantity to provide 70 to 80 foot-candles at 36 inches above
the finished floor. Provide energy-efficient drivers rated as cold temperature, high efficiency.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 13
148 04 November 2019
− All LED lighting fixtures must have high lumen package output, low temperature driver, and
moisture-proof-type units.
• Closures: Closure strips of materials matching the exposed exterior of the Environmental Room must
be furnished and installed wherever a space exists between the walls and roof of the walk-in and
other walls, columns, ceilings, or ledges.
• Electrical Fittings: Provide two duplex outlets, 110V, 20 amp within each room except at -20°C
units. Recess the outlets into the wall panel and extend concealed conduit up within the wall to above
ceiling panel.
• Performance Testing:
− Provide equipment for testing and perform tests. Tests must confirm that rooms conform to the
following standards:
 The maximum allowable deviation from the set-point temperature of the room measured at
any point on a horizontal plane measured 40 inches above finished floor, must be 0.5°C in
warm rooms and 2°C in cold storage rooms. Within the permitted extremes, uniformity
standards must apply.
 Temperature control of ±0.1°C in warm rooms and ±0.3°C in cold storage rooms must be the
temperature at the sensor and must be the total variation in the temperature control of the
room. It should not be confused with temperature uniformity as noted below.
 Temperature uniformity (of 0.5°C except as noted below) refers to the maximum allowable
variation in temperature as measured on a horizontal plane 40 inches above finished floor
and within 12 inches of the walls throughout the entire room. Uniformity must be measured by
a multipoint strip chart recorder that uses a minimum of 12 thermo-couples during a
continuous 24-hour test period. Gradient from floor to ceiling must not be more than 1°C.
 Rooms must recover preset operating temperature within 5 minutes after door has been fully
opened to 75°F ambient temperature for a period of 1 full minute. Repeat door opening
operation, as described, three times during the 24-hour period, at least 1 hour apart.
 After completion of installation each room must be tested for a minimum of 24 hours at
extremes of temperature specified in Schedule of Rooms. Rooms specified to operate over a
range of temperatures must be tested for 24 hours at each of two setpoints (to be
determined) with the second test at the setpoint designated for operation at acceptance of
the unit.
 PMO must be given the option of witnessing and confirming test results. Notify PMO in
writing, prior to test.
13 30 00 SPECIAL STRUCTURES
Similarity in ancillary structures, color, and materials provides a thread of continuity in the outdoor spaces
on the base and reduces overall visual clutter.
Centrally locate and combine smaller structures to reduce visual clutter. Use non-weathering, corrosionresistant
materials. Landscape ancillary structures consistent with larger structures. Do not use temporary
buildings. Minimize the use and number of storage buildings, and consolidate storage buildings in
low-visibility areas.
13 34 19 Metal Building Systems
Provide a complete system comprised of structural steel framing, metal roof panels, interior and exterior
wall panels, thermal insulation, coiling overhead doors, personnel doors, gutters/downspouts, flashing,
and all accessories required to provide a complete building.
DIVISION 13 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 149
Structural Steel: Comply with American Institute of Steel Construction 60, Specifications for Structural
Steel Buildings.
Verify risk category of each structure with Government, and provide a system that complies with the
Tyndall AFB wind speed criteria (USAF, 2019b) and the requirements listed above.
Use manufacturer’s standard components, colors, and finishes that provide 20-year weathertightness and
finish warranties.
Deflection and drift limits must be no greater than the following:
• Purlins and Rafters: Vertical deflection of 1/240 of the span
• Girts: Horizontal deflection of 1/120 of the span
• Metal Roof Panels: 1/240 of the span
• Metal Wall Panels: 1/180 of the span
• Lateral Drift: 1/100 of the building height
• Design secondary framing system to accommodate deflection of primary framing and construction
tolerances, and to maintain clearances at openings
• Allow thermal movements from ambient and surface temperature changes as follows:
− 80°F ambient and 120°F material surfaces
13 40 00 INTEGRATED CONSTRUCTION
13 48 00 Sound, Vibration, and Seismic Control
Gypsum board walls required must be sound attenuated must be filled with mineral wool batts,
2.0 pounds per cubic foot density, unless otherwise noted. Fiberglass batts are not acceptable due to
density deficiencies.
Specific sound transmission class standards must dictate the exact construction.
DIVISION 14 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 151
DIVISION 14 CONVEYING EQUIPMENT
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience objectives and guidelines specific
to Division 14 work include:
• Energy efficiency
• Energy use reporting to the building energy monitoring system (see Division 25, Integrated
Automation)
• Universal Design
• Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a) and wind (USAF, 2019b) protection requirements
14 20 00 ELEVATORS
Elevator cabs that descend below the design flood elevation must be equipped with controls that prevent
the cab from descending into floodwaters. Elevator shafts must be designed to resist flood loads but are
not required to have flood openings or breakaway walls. To ensure the continuity of elevator service,
elevator penthouse walls must possess adequate wind and water resistance.
For additional resiliency information, refer to the following:
• FEMA 348: Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damage
• FEMA Technical Bulletin 4: Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas
in accordance with the National Flood Insurance Program
Specifications must require contractors installing elevators to include a 1-year service and maintenance
agreement included in the construction contract for all new elevators. (This is in addition to the standard,
1-year construction warranty.)
• All elevator doors must be located in the interior of the building.
• Comply with ASME A17.1/CSA B44.
• Comply with accessibility requirements in Section 407 in the United States Access Board’s ADA-ABA
Accessibility Guidelines and with International Code Council Standard A117.1.
• Provide manufacturer’s standard elevator systems.
• Provide hydraulic holeless beside-the-car single- or dual-cylinder system.
• Load rating for passenger elevators must be 3500 pounds.
• Load rating for freight elevators must be coordinated with the Government.
• Speed ratings must be a minimum of 75 fpm.
• Provide stand-by power and battery-powered lowering systems.
• Coordinate security features with Government and provide card-reader or keyswitch.
• Provide satin-finish stainless-steel ASTM A480/A480M at walls, doors, and ceilings. Floors must be
prepared to receive resilient tile flooring.
For each elevator, inclusion of the following energy efficient features must be specified:
• The elevators operate in a standby condition during off-peak periods. For example, the power side of
the lift controller and other operating equipment such as lift car lighting, user displays and ventilation
fans switch off when the lift has been idle for a prescribed length of time.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 14
152 04 November 2019
• The elevator car lighting and display lighting provides an average lamp efficacy (across all fittings in
the car) of more than 55 lamp lumens per circuit Watt.
• The lift uses a drive controller capable of variable speed, variable-voltage, and variable-frequency
control of the drive motor.
Additionally, where the use of regenerative drives is demonstrated to save energy, they are specified.
A regenerative drive should only be considered where it produces an energy saving greater than the
additional standby energy used to support the drives. Regenerative drives will typically be appropriate for
elevators with high travel and high intensity use.
DIVISION 21 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 153
DIVISION 21 FIRE SUPPRESSION
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience objectives and guidelines specific
to Division 21 work include the following:
• All fire suppression equipment for exterior use must be designed for the Tyndall AFB wind speed
requirements (USAF, 2019b). Such fire suppression equipment must be designed and detailed to
meet all requirements of the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC
for the applicable sections related to their material types.
• All flood-sensitive equipment including pumps, controls, communications and electrical equipment
must be located no lower than the adopted DFE for Tyndall AFB (USAF, 2019a), or be flood-proofed
to an elevation 1 foot above the DFE.
• Equipment must not be located within depressional areas and must be elevated a minimum of 1 foot
above finished grade.
• Design of fire suppression systems should consider implications on installation potable and nonpotable
water supplies in accordance with resiliency goals outlined in the Tyndall AFB Performance
Standards document.
The overall intent of these guidelines is to provide a robust water supply that provides for the suppression
requirements of each facility while respecting the environment and precious national resources, such as
waterways and drinking water. Reliability of the design should be informed by these guidelines for the
specific local hazard associated with high winds and flood waters, as well as maintaining compliance with
the requirements of the UFC. Where allowable, systems should include contacts that allow for monitoring
resource usage in support of various SMART goals.
21 10 00 WATER-BASED FIRE-SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS
• Piping that is Schedule 10 or lower is not permitted.
• Fire sprinkler piping must be painted red. Paint is required to reduce exterior corrosion; red is
required for identification.
• All fire protection systems must provide appropriate backflow prevention devices at the connection
point to the portions of the system supplying water for domestic purposes.
21 11 16 Facility Fire Hydrants
• Fire hydrants must be provided with vertical location indicators higher than flood-level response
trucks are capable of operating in or above the design flood level (whichever is lesser), to prevent
trucks from driving into hydrants.
• Fire hydrants near roadways must be provided with bollards or similar feature to protect against
vehicular damage in accordance with NFPA 1
21 13 39 Foam-Water Systems
• Foam suppressant must be stored above the design flood level.
• Foam containment must be equipped with backflow prevention to prevent the foam from leaving the
containment tank.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 21
154 04 November 2019
21 30 00 FIRE PUMPS
New fire pumps and controllers that serve buildings or areas above the design flood level must be located
above the design flood level. Where this is practically infeasible, access from the exterior or through a 2-
hour corridor is not required for pumps located on upper floors of fully sprinklered buildings.
Emergency power supply for the fire pumps and controllers that serve multiple buildings or areas above
the design flood level must be located above the design flood level. This includes batteries, switchgear,
and breakers.
21 40 00 FIRE-SUPPRESSION WATER STORAGE
The intention of Tyndall AFB is to provide sufficient quantity of fire protection water to all portions of the
installation through the fire water loop. Where the flow test, which must be conducted in accordance with
the requirements of the UFC, demonstrates insufficient flow is available, designs should consider
alternative means to supplement the water supply without providing storage tanks local to the project or
means to reduce the potable water supply demanded by the fire protection design. Justification for the
infeasibility of alternatives to local water storage tanks must be submitted for approval.
21 41 00 Storage Tanks for Fire-Suppression Water
Onsite water tanks must include capability to be manually filled in the event of a water supply disruption.
Design of new, onsite water tanks must include the written procedure for filling the tanks during water
supply disruption.
Avoid long suction pipes between fire water storage tanks and fire pumps by ensuring the tanks are close
to the pump house.
21 41 23 Ground Suction Storage Tanks for Fire Suppression Water
Aboveground fire water storage tanks must be constructed of welded carbon steel in accordance with
NFPA 22 and must meet the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements (USAF, 2019b).
DIVISION 22 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 155
DIVISION 22 PLUMBING
The plumbing systems must support Tyndall AFB as an Installation of the Future. Materials and products
used must be resilient and support sustainability and water reduction. Plumbing fixtures, appliances, and
appliance water supply lines must meet the performance standards of the Florida Water Star program.
https://floridawaterstar.com/ Innovative technologies, rainwater harvesting, gray water, condensate
recovery, legionella risk management, and low-flow fixtures are encouraged and must be incorporated
where possible. In times when the public potable water supply service is interrupted, water efficiency is a
key resiliency imperative to maximize the performance of a limited supply of potable water. All buildings
intended to be operational during prolonged power outages must have potable water and fixtures that are
available and operational in the event of a power outage.
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Comply with Universal Design standards.
See Sustainable and Resilient Design Requirements in these Technical Guidelines for potable water
efficiency Integrated Design requirements. Coordinate with Section 33 10 00, Water Utilities. Report
specification, installation and commissioning of water efficient features in the Sustainability and Resiliency
eNotebook as defined in Section 01 33 29, Sustainability and Resiliency Reporting.
22 00 00 PLUMBING
• Sterilize and test all new potable water piping systems. To facilitate installation and to minimize water
service “downtime,” prefabricate and sterilize all new equipment and piping before start of any work
on existing piping system excluding insulation.
• Backflow prevention must be provided on all new potable water and treated industrial water.
22 05 19 Meters and Gages for Plumbing Piping
All buildings must have water meters that are part of the Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI)
connected to the Installation-wide EMCS; the meter data will be interfaced to the Utilities Operation
Center (UOC) supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system via a communications data link.
The meter must also have relay outputs that can be controlled by the SCADA system.
Water meters must be installed in a mechanical space within the building for all new construction and
where feasible on renovation projects. Piping must meet all applicable plumbing codes and provide for
the manufacturer’s recommended distances to adjacent fittings to maintain meter accuracy.
Outdoor water meters are allowed only for renovation projects, when retrofit in the mechanical space is
determined not feasible. Outdoor water meters must be installed by the privatized utility provider on the
existing water service line.
• Each facility must include provisions to interface with the Installation EMCS.
• Meters for water and natural gas must be tied to the Installation EMCS.
• Natural gas and electricity e meters are also part of the AMI system and are connected to the EMCS
and must be installed on facilities with significant natural gas or water demand.
• Water meters must provide direct read per gallons. Refer to UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and
Sustainable Building Requirements, for additional metering requirements.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 22
156 04 November 2019
22 06 30.13 Domestic Water Heater Schedules
• Hot water must be generated by one of three options: waste heat recovery units on chillers, solar
panels, or gas-fired water heaters.
• Many municipalities are exploring electrification of their building systems to reduce or eliminate onsite
combustion to reduce emissions and meet carbon reduction targets. Project teams should consider
impacts of all electric systems in lieu of onsite fuel-fired equipment and discuss the options with the
Tyndall AFB PMO, if necessary.
• The use of heat exchangers for domestic hot water and process hot water is acceptable and
encouraged.
• Boilers and external combustion equipment must comply with Florida Rule 62-210.300, Florida
Administrative Code (F.A.C.) / 40 CFR 60, Subpart A & DC
22 07 00 Plumbing Insulation
• All utilities must be placed underground, if possible, especially laterals to buildings.
• Aboveground plumbing lines exterior to buildings must be both insulated and aluminum or PVC
jacketed. Lines susceptible to freezing must be heat-traced.
• Underground pipe insulation must be Gilsulate 500, or approved equal.
22 11 13 Facility Water Distribution Piping
• Underground building service utilities must be placed in concrete duct banks where feasible.
• Water distribution located in new structures may have a cross-linked polyethylene system. If a
manifold is used, then all manifolds must be copper or brass construction. Design of system must be
reviewed and approved by the Installation Architect prior to a 35% design submittal.
• Piping must use dielectric unions at all connections of dissimilar metals.
• Isolators must be used where piping materials change.
• Waste, vent, and potable water piping systems must be PVC/chlorinated PVC (CPVC)
Schedule 80 pipe.
• Install valves with stems upright or horizontal, not inverted and in accessible locations or with access
doors. Provide chain operators on valves higher than 7 feet above finished floor. Control valves and
isolation valves 2 inches or larger must be supervised via the EMCS.
• All tapping must be done with tapping tees for piping materials and special outlets.
The design must incorporate water quality standards. Water must be properly filtered and treated for
consumption. Water delivered to the project for human consumption is recommended to meet the
following thresholds:
• Lead less than 0.01 milligrams per liter (mg/L)
• Arsenic less than 0.01 mg/L
• Antimony less than 0.006 mg/L
• Mercury less than 0.002 mg/L
• Nickel less than 0.07 mg/L
• Copper less than 1.0 mg/L
• Cadmium less than 0.005 mg/L
• Chromium (total) less than 0.1 mg/L
Coordinate with Section 33 10 00, Water Utilities.
DIVISION 22 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 157
For water intended for human consumption, specify and use solder and flux to connect plumbing pipe
onsite that meets the California AB1953 standard, which specifies that solder not contain more than
0.2% lead, and flux not more than a weighted average of 0.25% lead for wetted surfaces. The “lead free”
label as defined by the Safe Drinking Water Act does not provide adequate screening for the purposes of
this requirement because the Safe Drinking Water Act defines “lead free” as solders and flux containing
0.2% lead or less.
For water intended for human consumption, specify and use pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, and
faucets that meet the California law AB1953 of a weighted average lead content of the wetted surface
area of not more than 0.25% lead.
22 13 00 Facility Sanitary Sewerage
All sanitary sewer lines must discharge by gravity to the Installation sanitary sewer collection system.
Provide backflow preventers to stop flooding of the building in the case of inflow and infiltration into the
sanitary sewer system during a high rainfall storm event.
Where lift stations are required, they must be constructed outside the building footprint in an easily
accessible location. The station must be located and screened in accordance with the Installation
architectural standards. Coordinate with Section 33 30 00, Sanitary Sewerage.
22 14 00 Facility Storm Drainage
General rainwater discharge must be coordinated with the site design to discharge to a pre-treatment
BMP, constructed with any new or significantly renovated facility project, prior to entering the overall
Installation storm drainage system.
22 14 29 Sump Pumps
Sump pumps should be avoided. Where sump pumps are proposed, confirm Florida Department of the
Environment permit requirements for the site concerning treatment and discharge of groundwater.
Contaminated groundwater has been found within the flightline district.
22 14 53 Rainwater Harvesting Systems
Rainwater harvesting is a consideration for a supplemental resilient water supply during an extended
"islanding" scenario without public water supply.
Rainwater harvesting systems must be integrated into the stormwater management compliance design of
the building site and selection of roof material. Integrated design must include controlled overflow to the
stormwater conveyance systems. Rainwater harvesting is recommended for roof systems only and not for
runoff from vehicular pavement.
Rainwater harvesting systems must be a complete integrated system. The control system must include a
mode of operation that allows the system to be used as a supplemental raw water supply. Consider what
treatment would be required to achieve potable water standards from harvested rainwater. The rainwater
may be used for landscape irrigation or other nonpotable uses (such as toilet flushing or fire water tank
storage) during normal operation. Design should assume that the rainwater harvesting system must
operate by gravity or by connection to onsite backup electrical generation during a service interruption
from the public water supply.
The Environmental Resource Permit Applicant’s Handbook Volume II design manual published by FDEP
and Northwest Florida Water Management District contains local design criteria for rainwater harvesting.
But its criteria is focused on the use of wet ponds for landscape irrigation only.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 22
158 04 November 2019
22 30 00 PLUMBING EQUIPMENT
A heat trap must be installed on the hot water supply system on both the supply and return water lines
unless upstream component(s) incorporate heat traps.
22 40 00 PLUMBING FIXTURES
Plumbing fixture models and faucet models must be coordinated with the Installation and existing models
to adhere to required styles. WaterSense faucets must be used to the maximum extent possible for all
applicable fixture types. Care must be taken to make sure that faucets and fixtures are compatible with
ADA requirements where required. Maximum fixture flow rates must not exceed 1.1 gallons per flushing
cycle for water closets, 0.125 gallon per flushing cycle for urinals, 2.0 gpm for residential showers,
1.5 gpm for public showers, 0.35 gpm for public lavatories not connected to on-demand water heaters,
1.5 gpm for sink faucets, 1.25 gpm for prerinse spray valves, and 1 gpm per rack for dishwashers.
Lavatories faucet must provide a minimum cycle time of 3 seconds. Particularly for water closets and
urinals, both for Facilities Sustainment, and Restoration and Modernization and MILCON project types,
use of these low-flow and low flush fixtures must be coordinated with overall plumbing system design,
including (but not limited to) fixture or flush valve compatibility, length of lateral drains, slope of existing or
new lateral drainage system, and position of the fixtures relative to the vertical drain stack. All other
plumbing fixtures and faucets must be in compliance with the FBC.
• For facilities that have shared use with the public, fixture, and faucets selection may be revised if
required to meet vandal-resistant standards.
• Provide floor drains in every area that has a water closet. Provide a hose bibb to the prime trap or
provide trap primers or trap guards.
• Generally, combine vents from different stacks throughout the facility, and provide only a single ventthrough-
roof for the entire facility.
• Install anti-freeze hydrants on the exterior of the facility.
• Install a trap with each fixture that is easily removable for servicing and cleaning. Provide all restroom
lavatory faucets with washerless dual controls.
• Electric water coolers must be lead-free and CFC-free. Provide handicapped-accessible models
where appropriate; comply with ADA, NEMA, and UFGS requirements. Drinking fountains and electric
water coolers must be provided in a convenient recessed location. Devices must include a bottle filler.
• The performance of automated devices must be tested and included in the commissioning of facility
plumbing systems.
DIVISION 23 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 159
DIVISION 23 HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIRCONDITIONING
(HVAC)
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common
products, process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and
guidelines specific to Division 23 work include the following:
• The HVAC systems must support Tyndall AFB as an Installation of the Future. Designs must
incorporate resilience, sustainability, and SMART systems focusing on areas of energy efficiency,
future mission adaptability, appropriate life-cycle cost analysis (LCCA), equipment resiliency,
metering, monitoring, and commissioning.
• HVAC cooling tower equipment must meet Florida Water Star standards specified in the Florida
Water Star online technical manual.
http://floridawaterstar.com/technicalmanual/indoor/commercialcoolingtowers.html
• Building function, climate, and location must be included in the analysis when selecting a mechanical
system. Passive design aspects must be included in the mechanical system designs. For example,
actual building envelope materials, shading, and air barriers must be included in equipment sizing.
• The primary method of space conditioning will be ducted HVAC systems that use a building-wide
chilled water loop for cooling and a building-wide hot water loop for heating. Individual split systems,
window units, and fan coil units are not preferred.
• Durability, availability of replacement parts in the local area (near Tyndall AFB), maintainability, type
of warranty, and service from local manufacturing representatives must be taken into consideration
during design and procurement.
• Future mission adaptability requires a minimum of 20% additional mechanical capacity beyond code
requirements or initial needs.
• All other HVAC equipment not explicitly defined must be designed for the Tyndall AFB wind speed
requirements (USAF, 2019b). Such HVAC equipment must be designed and detailed to meet all
requirements of the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone provisions of the latest edition of the FBC for the
applicable sections related to their material types. Mechanical yard walls may be included in the
protection of the equipment and, therefore, requirements on individual pieces of equipment located
within these yards may be reduced as appropriate.
• Installation of HVAC equipment must meet the Tyndall AFB DFE criteria (USAF, 2019a).
• Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common
products, process, and documentation requirements.
23 00 00 HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIR-CONDITIONING (HVAC)
• When possible, the use of central cooling plants for adjacent buildings are highly encouraged.
Cooling plants must be designed for energy efficiency, flexibility, and resiliency.
• Use values from the latest version of UFC 3-400-02, Engineering Weather Data. Do not use ASHRAE
design temperatures.
• Tyndall AFB has corrosive, salt-laden air that accelerates degradation of materials. Infrastructure
must be designed and installed to accomplish design performance and life spans in an aggressively
corrosive marine environment. Designs must address measures taken to resist the effects of
corrosion.
• Sand entrained in the wind has a sand blasting effect on infrastructure at Tyndall AFB. Corrosionresistant
coatings that have been subjected to scratches or nicks do not prevent the establishment of
corrosion cells that degrade materials. It is, therefore, important that intrinsically corrosion-resistant
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 23
160 04 November 2019
materials, such as Type 316 stainless steel, for example, be used for outdoor enclosures and for
structural support.
• Provide positive ventilation in attics and crawl spaces.
• Positive pressurization of buildings to offset infiltration is recommended at approximately 0.05-inch
water gauge (WG) or 8% greater than exhaust air.
• Pre-treat ventilation air when feasible and perform a National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) building life cycle cost (BLLC) analysis, latest version, as documentation.
• When evaluating systems at Tyndall AFB, use the NIST BLCC program to develop the LCCA, the
LCCA must include the following:
− All associated system equipment (for example, the chiller LCCA must include pumps, motors,
fans, chillers, cooling towers, and piping)
− Any equipment with a corrosion-resistant coating that is considered in the LCCA must also
include a scenario that describes coating failure.
− Factors for Tyndall AFB's environment (including salt corrosion, sand blasting, and degradation)
− Inflation, first costs, replacement costs, O&M costs, and similar
− A replacement life span specific to the Tyndall AFB area
− Rental equipment to support missions while equipment is being replaced
− Equipment efficiencies at full load, part load, peak, and off-peak seasons
− Tyndall AFB-specific utility rates
• Dedicated outdoor air systems are preferred and must be used on systems with an outdoor air flow
rate above 750 cfm to pre-condition outdoor air before serving distribution air-handling units (AHUs)
or conditioned space. A dedicated outdoor air handler must be equipped with an energy-recovery
ventilator that uses a desiccant heat wheel or flat plate heat exchanger to transfer load between
exhaust air and non-hazardous outdoor air. Outdoor air systems are to be screened by CMU walls.
• Natural ventilation should be avoided at Tyndall AFB because of moisture and mold issues. When
natural ventilation is used, controls must be included to automatically open and close windows/vents
to optimize system performance. The design analysis must also clearly define how undesired
moisture problems will be mitigated and eliminated.
• Systems must be designed to incorporate indoor air quality best practices:
− Locate outdoor air intakes away from nearby sources of pollutants and water sources that may
introduce legionella.
− Incorporate airflow monitoring equipment into the HVAC system design. The technique for
monitoring outdoor air depends on the HVAC system.
− For residential units, each dwelling unit must be provided with carbon monoxide monitors for
each floor.
− Sufficiently exhaust each space where hazardous gases or chemicals may be present or used
(for example, garages, housekeeping and laundry areas, and copying and printing rooms), using
a minimum of 0.50 cfm per square foot (2.54 liters per second per square meter), to create
negative pressure with respect to adjacent spaces when the doors to the room are closed. Install
monitoring systems with sensors designed to detect the specific contaminants. An alarm must
indicate any unusual or unsafe conditions. Consider typical substances found in the particular
building type, and review activities and processes that will occur. Substances might include
cleaning supplies, laboratory chemicals, or materials required for vehicular maintenance.
 Monitors must measure the following within a regularly occupied or common space in the
building, as appropriate by building and activity type:
o Particulate matter (accuracy 2 micrograms per cubic meter [μg/m³] + 15% of reading at
values between 0 and 150 μg/m³)
DIVISION 23 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 161
o CO2 (accuracy 50 ppm + 3% of reading at values between 400 and 2,000 ppm)
o Carbon monoxide (accuracy 1 ppm at values between 0 and 10 ppm)
o Ozone (accuracy 10 parts per billion [ppb] at values between 0 and 100 ppb)
o Nitrogen dioxide (accuracy 20 ppb at values between 0 and 100 ppb)
o Total VOCs (accuracy 20 μg/m³ + 20% of reading at values between 150 and 2,000 ppm)
o Formaldehyde (accuracy 20 ppb at values between 0 and 100 ppb)
 Monitor density is minimum one per floor or one every 3,500 feet, whichever is more
stringent. Monitors are sited at locations compliant with the following standards:
o 3 to 6 feet above the finished floor at locations where occupants would typically be
seated or standing.
o Sampling points must be at least 3.3 feet away from doors, windows, and air supply or
exhaust outlets.
o Measurements are taken at intervals of no longer than 10 minutes for particulate matter
and CO2 and no longer than 1 hour for other pollutants.
− Typically, apparatus bays in fire stations or similar facilities are not designed for human
occupancy and would not be required to meet the above standards. If these spaces will
be occupied, however, they must be ventilated in accordance with the applicable reference
standard above.
− Vehicle repair facilities and maintenance bay-space types include military buildings where trucks,
tanks, aircraft, and other vehicles are being serviced. Because these are occupied spaces, they
must meet the above standards.
− For healthcare facilities, determine the minimum outdoor air intake flow for mechanical ventilation
systems using the ventilation rates in ASHRAE 170, Ventilation of Health Care Facilities (with
errata), or the requirements of the Facility Guidelines Institute (FGI) Guidelines for Design and
Construction of Health Care Facilities. For any area not covered in ASHRAE 170 or the FGI
guidelines, follow ASHRAE 62.1 or a local equivalent, whichever is more stringent and meets the
minimum requirements of ASHRAE 170.
− For commercial kitchen spaces, makeup air velocity near (or directed at) the hood is less than
75 fpm, replacement air introduced directly into the exhaust hood cavity does not exceed 10% of
the hood exhaust airflow rate, and at least 50% of the air that replaces the exhaust air is
conditioned transfer air rather than makeup air.
• Systems must be designed to incorporate thermal comfort:
− Spaces must be designed to accommodate 98% of the standard occupied hours of the year, 95%
of regularly occupied spaces achieve thermal conditions representing Predicted Mean Vote levels
within ±0.5; Predicted Percentage of Dissatisfied ≤10% (per ASHRAE 55).
− For commercial kitchen spaces, the operative temperature in the kitchen does not exceed 80°F at
any time.
− For residential units, all regularly occupied spaces must have the flexibility to accommodate the
installation of cooling device(s) that allow tenants to maintain desirable comfort conditions in
bedrooms and living spaces.
• Provide separate mechanical, electrical, and communications rooms.
• Avoid placing HVAC units and any other mechanical equipment on top of roofs (that is, no
penetrations through roofs) due to problems with roof leaks, accessibility, and maintainability
standards. If rooftop equipment is necessary, use existing roof warranty holder to perform the work, if
applicable. Indoor equipment is preferred. Mechanical equipment rooms must:
− Be provided with a floor drain or floor sink, which must have a trap guard or trap primer
− Be located along exterior walls with exterior access doors
− Be provide with location for temporary cooling equipment tie-in
− Be provided with domestic water with hose bib and 115V power outlets
− Include space for all plumbing equipment
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 23
162 04 November 2019
• All mechanical equipment must be mounted on 6-inch housekeeping pads with vibration isolators to
prevent the transmission of vibration and mechanically transmitted sound to the building structure.
• Provide beams and/or overhead attachment points as appropriate to facilitate large motor and other
heavy equipment replacement.
• Outdoor equipment placement must:
− Be elevated above the flood plain
− Consider solar effects on operating conditions (south building orientation, shading from
equipment yard walls, and similar). All outdoor equipment materials must be UV stabilized.
− Avoid roof-mounted equipment when possible. Use ridgeline vents or gable vents instead of
roof-mounted rotating fan vents. When roof-mounted equipment is used, equipment must be
provided with appropriate supports rated for wind risk category and must be coordinated with a
structural engineer.
− Equipment yards must:
 Comply with all architectural, safety, and resiliency requirements
 Have either concrete or permeable gravel
 Be provided with a means for drainage
 Be provided with a hose bib
 Be provided with safety showers when appropriate for chemicals present
 Be covered by security cameras and integrated into EMCS and operation centers
 Be provided with convenience receptacles
• Provide prevention and control measures to reduce potential risk from legionella bacteria. These may
include, but are not limited to:
− Avoiding water temperatures between 68°F and 113°F and conditions that favor the growth of
legionella bacteria and other microorganisms
− Avoiding water stagnation that may encourage the growth of biofilm
− Avoiding the use of materials that harbor bacteria and other microorganisms or provide nutrients
for microbial growth
− Controlling the release of water spray
− Maintaining the cleanliness of the system and water in it
− Using water treatment techniques such as biocides, chlorination, and heat
23 05 00 Common Work Results for HVAC
• Ground-source heat pumps must not be used for the design without permission from the Base
Architect and Base Engineer.
• All HVAC equipment, such as AHUs, VAV boxes, and air terminals, must be accessible for
maintenance via removable ceiling tiles or access panels. Access points must be located and large
enough to allow filter replacement.
• Use of glycol in piping systems should be avoided. If glycol is specified, provide an LCCA to prove
added pump energy is less than the LCCA of other freeze-protection measures, such as heat trace.
• Provide variable-frequency drives (VFDs) for all motors more than 10 horsepower (HP).
• Design specifications must require O&M documentation, to include an outline of a maintenance
program for all major equipment and systems.
• HVAC systems for healthcare or similar spaces should be considered Life Safety Systems when
performing the NFPA 99 risk assessment. Ensure that HVAC loads are properly included in
emergency power/fuel calculations.
DIVISION 23 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 163
• Refer to other sections for additional standards for specialty areas within the facilities, such as
communication rooms, refrigerated rooms, and similar.
23 05 19 Meters and Gages for HVAC Piping
• Each facility must include provisions to interface with the Installation EMCS.
• Provide sub-metering of HVAC equipment energy and water (such as cooling tower makeup water)
as required in UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements.
23 05 29 Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment
• All exterior supports and equipment attachments must be designed for appropriate category and
windspeed of the facility.
• The design must consider and account for the effects of aircraft vibration on facilities and design
appropriate vibration controls and supports.
23 05 93 Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC
• TAB must be provided for all new and major renovations of systems.
• Provide TAB for both air and water systems.
23 06 00 Schedules for HVAC
• Efficiency ratings must meet or exceed those required by ASHRAE 90.1 and the FBC.
• Energy recovery must be included at a minimum of that required by ASHRAE 90.1 and the FBC.
Consider wraparound heat pipes, heat pipes, and energy cores.
• Demand controlled ventilation will be designed and installed in all AHUs. Control must be in
compliance with USAF policy, and may require occupancy controls instead of CO2 based controls.
• Design must aim to reduce operational energy consumption and the associated carbon emissions.
23 06 50 Schedules for Central Heating Equipment
• Use of natural gas is preferred.
• Many municipalities are exploring electrification of their building systems to reduce or eliminate onsite
combustion to reduce emissions and meet carbon reduction targets. Project teams should consider
impacts of all electric systems in comparison of onsite fuel-fired equipment and discuss the options
with the Tyndall AFB PMO if necessary.
• Natural gas piping from the main, to, and including the gas regulator is provided by the Installation
gas supplier, West Florida Natural Gas Co. (Bruce Christmas, (904) 872-618). Piping is of plastic and
coated steel pipe.
• Natural gas distribution lines must be polyethylene pipe, (yellow) in color, conforming to American
Gas Association Standards PE 2406 or PE 2306. Connections must be made by heat fusion.
• Heating systems must use 0% by volume ethylene glycol.
Boilers and external combustion equipment must comply with Florida Rule 62-210.300, F.A.C./
40 CFR 60, Subpart A & DC
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 23
164 04 November 2019
23 06 60 Schedules for Central Cooling Equipment
• Provide cooling systems.
• Cooling plants must have a minimum of two chillers, two chilled water pumps, and one cooling cell
minimum to incorporate system redundancy. If the plant is water-cooled, provide a minimum of two
condenser water pumps. No more than four chillers may be used in a single plant unless the cooling
load exceeds 1,500 tons.
− Standard capacity split must be for equipment selection 60% / 60% for smaller systems and N+1
in larger systems for resiliency and reliability, at a minimum.
− Cooling plants must include connections for temporary equipment connections.
− Multiple buildings sharing cooling plants is preferred. Consider connecting to existing buildings
and provide connections for future expansion.
− Cooling plant control must be optimized for total plant energy consumption. Pumps must include
VFDs and chillers must be selected for optimum efficiency for the majority of the operating time.
• In terms of HVAC, do not oversize cooling systems, consider part‐load performance in equipment
selection, use of modular HVAC equipment rather than sizing for future expansion capacity, and
implement a building Cx program.
• Air conditioning condensate recovery systems must be used for systems larger than 200 tons for
purposes, such as process water, cooling tower makeup, and irrigation, unless proven not life-cycle
cost effective.
• Chilled water delta T must be designed to be 15°F at all times or the maximum allowable per the
chiller manufacturer’s specifications. The chilled water supply temperature must be designed to be no
lower than 42°F. Increasing the chilled water temperature during mild outdoor air temperatures
(chilled water temperature reset) will be enabled when the control system allows.
23 06 70.13 Indoor, Central-Station Air-Handling Unit Schedule
• Do not use air economizers at Tyndall AFB.
• Use copper tube, copper fin coils for all coils exposed to an excess of 25% outside air. Use either
copper or aluminum fin and tube condensers with factory applied coating to prevent corrosion of
outdoor air-cooled air conditioning equipment.
• Cooling coil drain pans must be stainless steel, have a minimum depth of 4 inches, be insulated with
1-inch thick uncompressed insulation, and provided with two connections, one on each side of the
unit, and be sloped so as to ensure complete condensate drainage from a single connection.
• All AHUs must provide enhanced filtration. All filter frames must be made of galvanized steel and/ or
material with an expected life of 25 years. Filters must be disposable with a Minimum Efficiency
Reporting Value of at least 13, and it must be specified that AHU filter(s) be replaced by the
contractor on all renovation projects prior to completion. For AHUs with pelleted fillers, filters must
use a 2-inch filter frame. UV sanitation must be considered where appropriate.
23 06 70.16 Packaged Outdoor HVAC Equipment Schedule
• HVAC/refrigeration cabinets and internal HVAC components (including interior coils and exterior
equipment, including packaged rooftops, condensing units, AHUs, air-cooled chillers, and copper
piping) must have a water-based synthetic polymer coating spray-applied. A standard factory coating
is not sufficient and will not be acceptable. The corrosion durability will be confirmed through testing
to no less than 5,000 hours salt spray resistance per ASTM B117 with a UV resistance performance
of 500 hours, minimum.
• Direct expansion units must only be acceptable for facility cooling loads of 25 tons or less.
DIVISION 23 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 165
23 06 80 Schedules for Decentralized HVAC Equipment
• If individual fan coil units are used, incorporate considerations for humidity control including, but not
limited to, the use of pre‐cooled outside air, dehumidified outside air, or use of a split coil fan coil unit
with one section of the coil dedicated to cooling outside air continuously. Use modulating chilled water
control valves in lieu of two‐position valves. Fan coil units must be fully insulated and provided with
secondary drain pans when located over areas sensitive to leaks. Select fan coil units with
considering noise factors and locate in areas that provide adequate maintenance access. Provide fan
coil units with three-speed fan control. Where possible, locate the fan coil unit in a lockable closet that
is easily accessible. Provide auxiliary drain pans under piping and condensate drains to reduce
leak potential.
23 06 80.19 Radiant Heating Unit Schedule
• Heating of high-bays and hangars must be provided with infrared systems, unless prohibited by Air
Force Occupational Safety and Health (AFOSH) safety regulations.
23 07 13 Duct Insulation
• Ductwork and insulation must be sealed with vapor proof mastic. Standard duct material will be
galvanized steel constructed in accordance with Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors'
National Association (SMACNA) guidelines. Provide insulation with vapor barrier. Mastic and
insulation must meet VOC standards set forth in Division 01.
• Ensure insulation thicknesses specified will maintain surface temperature of insulation above
ambient dewpoint in instances where the actual ambient temperature and humidity exceed the
above conditions.
• Insulate supply, return, and outside air ducts.
• All ductwork insulation is on the exterior of the ductwork for prevention of mold growth inside
ductwork, for better indoor air quality and for easier cleaning of interior ductwork.
• Exterior ductwork must be avoided. If exterior duct is used, it must be Type 316 stainless steel.
23 07 16 HVAC Equipment Insulation
• Use double-wall, insulated AHUs (with a minimum 2-inch insulated panels).
23 07 19 HVAC Piping Insulation
• Provide a vapor barrier and coatings for all cold piping 60°F and lower. Ensure that pipe insulation
vapor-barrier jacket is factory-applied. Give special attention to the details of construction and to the
specifications for the vapor barrier to ensure complete moisture and vapor seal where insulation
terminates against metal hangers, anchors, and other projections through insulation on cold surfaces
with vapor barriers. Insulation must meet VOC standards set forth in Division 01.
• Increase insulation thicknesses as required to maintain surface temperature above dewpoint of
ambient air.
• Provide an aluminum or stainless-steel jacket on insulated piping located outdoors.
23 08 00 Commissioning of HVAC
• Third-party Cx must be provided for all new and major renovations of systems for all HVAC systems.
• Cx must be performed for all operating modes of the facility. See Section 01 91 00, Commissioning.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 23
166 04 November 2019
23 09 00 Instrumentation and Control for HVAC
• All direct digital control (DDC) systems must be 100% integrated with the Installation’s existing EMCS
(Siemens building control system). Do not use pneumatic control components. All systems more than
5 tons (cumulative) will be controlled by EMCS. Facilities that do not meet requirements for EMCS
must have programmable and password-protected thermostats. Coordinate with Division 25,
Integrated Automation.
• If not controlled by the EMCS, programmable thermostats should be installed to reduce space
temperatures to requirements listed in the Energy Management Policy Manual. Zone air sensors will
have the capability to monitor temperature, humidity, and CO2.
• Provide an energy dashboard at each building to display building energy and water consumption with
data from the Installation EMCS. Coordinate location of dashboard with architectural plan to provide
current data to building occupants as a user learning and engagement tool.
• Controls must account for ATFP measures, for example, emergency air shut-off for air distribution
systems and major alarm reporting at both the local building controls and Tyndall AFB UOC.
• Provide an automated refrigerant leak detection system in place for all equipment that use
refrigerants. System must provide an alarm to EMCS at a minimum upon leak detection.
• Temperature sensors with set points controlled by the EMCS are preferred. Avoid the use of
programmable thermostats in spaces when possible. Zone air sensors must be capable of monitoring
temperature, humidity, and CO2.
• Pump VFDs will respond to downstream system pressure and fan VFDs will respond to downstream
static pressure.
• The EMCS must be provided with a schematic of the mechanical room included in the graphics
showing equipment and operating conditions, including setpoints and current readings.
• Control panels deemed critical to the functioning and habitability of a building should be located in a
floodproof area or above the Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a).
• Provide standby power for the control system head end. If critical systems will not function without the
EMCS (for example, when there is no manual override for control loops), standby power should be
provided. Standby power should also be provided for systems that require monitoring during an
emergency (for example, demand reduction controls, fuel oil, and/or generator monitoring).
• Locate head end above the Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a) to avoid replacement following a flood
event.
• Split DDC systems into below-DFE and above-DFE zones so that loss of submerged areas does not
impact the rest of the building. The communication network and power source for these panels should
be separated by their relationship to the DFE. This will keep communication errors from a damaged
panel creating excessive “traffic” on the network, thus slowing or freezing communication on the
balance of the network. Additionally, the power source for EMCS equipment at or below the DFE
should not service equipment above the DFE. If properly arranged, an equipment short will not
interrupt power to panels operating above the Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a).
• Control panels must not be located below flood elevation from serving devices located above
flood elevation.
• Include a “manual operation mode” in emergency planning documents.
23 20 00 HVAC PIPING AND PUMPS
• Motors must have the capability of continuously driving their respective pump to any operating point
on the pump’s performance curve without overloading.
• A flowmeter must be provided at the discharge of each pump to measure fluid flow rate.
DIVISION 23 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 167
• Pump shut-off must be no less than 120% of the total system design head or the total system design
head plus 20 feet of water (whichever is less). Unless physically impossible, the minimum acceptable
pump efficiency at design condition is 70%.
• Pumps must be set up in a configuration with common manifolds for suction and discharge.
23 21 13 Hydronic Piping
• Use copper pipes on chilled water and heating water systems less than 3 inches in diameter with
brazed joints.
• Black steel pipe must be used for heating/chilled water systems 3 inches in diameter and greater.
Type K copper flexible tubing must not be used in hydronic systems.
• All piping must be properly pressure tested and flushed.
• Pipes must be sized for a maximum velocity and flow rate per the “>4400 Hours/Year, Other” column
of ASHRAE 90.1 for all systems.
• Chilled water and heating water distribution systems must:
− Be provided in a loop format with isolation valves for serviceability and resiliency. There must be
one cooling loop per facility.
− Install thermometers and gauges (with control system input points) at inlets and outlets of all heat
exchange devices; that is, converters, chillers, water cooled condensers, boilers, and similar.
− Provide air vents with isolation valves at all high points and at heat exchanges, and low point
drains.
− Use chemical feeders for water treatment.
− Install flow measurement equipment (that is, orifice plates) with control system input points for all
major heat exchange devices and each pump.
− Provide isolation valves at each building and branch piping.
• Service combination valves, which serve multiple functions, must not be acceptable. Individual valves
(for example, isolation valves and check valves) must be provided.
• Use PVC/CPVC for condensate drain lines. Insulate condensate piping that is used for energy
recovery or routed in ceiling plenums.
• Use a four-pipe system with provisions for heat recovery on HVAC condensers (desuperheaters, heat
recovery, and similar) for preheating hot water.
• Standard color-coded labels (ANSI A 13.1) must be specified for all piping at 10-foot intervals.
Colored pipe labels must be printed to indicate the type of fluid carried; for example, chilled water
supply, hot water return, and direction of fluid flow (arrows).
Table 23-1. Pipe Label
Fluid Type Background Color Lettering Color
Boiler feedwater Yellow Black
Chilled water Green White
Condensate return Yellow Black
Condenser water Green White
Hot water supply/ret Yellow Black
Make up water Green White
Steam supply Yellow White
Fuel Yellow Black
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 23
168 04 November 2019
23 21 13.13 Underground Hydronic Piping
• Provide trace wire/warning tape installed above all new utility lines 10 to 15 inches below grade.
Tracer wire must be labeled and have connection points at each end and at intervals with a maximum
spacing of 500 feet to allow locators to connect to tracer. Tape must be direct-buried with warning
label indicating appropriate utility and caution. Wire must be a minimum American Wire Gauge
(AWG) No. 12, copper clad steel with minimum 30-mil polyethylene jacket. The wore must be
color-coated to match the specific utility. Provide cathodic protection for all buried metal components.
• Use double-walled, pre-insulated pipe for buried, hydronic water piping between the Mechanical
Room and the plant equipment.
23 30 00 HVAC AIR DISTRIBUTION
• The use of duct board in HVAC systems is not allowed.
• Flexible duct is limited to low-pressure systems 5 feet or less in length.
23 31 13 Metal Ducts
• All ductwork must be sheet metal; no fibrous duct board is allowed.
23 33 00 Air Duct Accessories
• Weather hoods, exhaust stacks, and vent caps must use stainless steel.
• Louvers must be hurricane-rated and Miami-Dade approved for high wind load and impact resistance.
• Ensure that fresh air louvers are not located adjacent to heat rejection equipment (such as cooling
towers) and are at heights that will satisfy ATFP criteria. The louvers must also be motorized and
connected to the control system to shut tightly when equipment is turned off.
23 33 13.16 Fire Dampers
• Sealing around penetrations and fire-rated assemblies without an approved firestopping system is not
permitted. When an approved UL system exists, no engineering judgment will be accepted.
• Ensure that firestop systems do not re-establish the structural integrity of load-bearing partitions or
assemblies or support live loads and traffic.
23 62 00 Packaged Compressor and Condenser Units
• Selected air-cooled condensers must provide a maximum condensing temperature of 20°F above
design ambient.
23 64 00 Packaged Water Chillers
• The use of air-cooled chillers must be approved by the Installation Engineer and must be proven lifecycle
cost-effective using reduced life spans per historical data at Tyndall AFB. Do not use air-cooled
chillers on facilities with cooling loads greater than 150 tons.
• Chilled water systems with a capacity of 100 tons or greater must be served by a minimum of two
chillers to ensure reliability and prevent short cycling.
23 65 00 Cooling Towers
• Cooling tower manufacturer must be coordinated with Tyndall AFB engineering department for
preferred or required companies.
DIVISION 23 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 169
• Material:
− Cooling towers must not be manufactured of galvanized steel.
− Those with capacities of 500 tons or less and must be crafted of steel conforming to AISI 316,
316L, 304, or 304L. Fiberglass or ceramic towers will be acceptable only upon favorable LCCA
and approval from the Installation Engineer.
− Ground support legs for cooling towers must be reinforced concrete or corrosion-protected steel
terminating in concrete.
• Location:
− Do not construct cooling towers over grass that has to be mowed. Instead use concrete or a
gravel bed/permeable liner under cooling towers.
− Cooling towers must be located in secure, walled mechanical/equipment yards with lockable
gates, that consolidate all exterior mechanical/electrical equipment into protected areas.
Equipment yard construction must be coordinated and comply with safety, security, and resiliency
requirements of this document.
− Allow adequate room within mechanical yards for required cooling tower airflow and for
maintenance actions, including accommodating repair-by-replacement.
• Components:
− Fans must be either gear-driven or direct-driven, rather than belt-driven.
− Provide cooling towers with a VFD.
− Where the cooling load exceeds 150 tons, the cooling tower must be composed of multiple
modules configured to optimize resiliency.
DIVISION 25 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 171
DIVISION 25 INTEGRATED AUTOMATION
The integrated automation must support Tyndall AFB as an Installation of the Future in to achieve the
program sustainable and resilient performance requirements. Refer to Division 01 for overarching
sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product, process, and documentation
requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines specific to Division 25 work
include the following:
• All flood-sensitive equipment including controls, communications and electrical power supply
equipment must be located no lower than the adopted DFE for Tyndall AFB, or be flood-proofed to an
elevation 1 foot above the DFE.
• Equipment must not be located within depressional areas and must be elevated a minimum of 1 foot
above finished grade.
The intent of this division is to provide an integration and automation framework to converge all
Installation-wide facility systems and select equipment into an open, interoperable software platform for
centralized command and control. Adherence of all Installation-wide facility systems to industry standard
protocol ANSI/ASHRAE 135-2016 Building Automation and Control Network Internet Protocol
(BACnet/IP) is required to assure protocol and data object interoperability between all system
components.
The Integrated Automation (Division 25) contractor must be contracted directly with the prime contractor
to provide the following operational technologies and components in addition to the integration standards
defined herein:
• 11 10 00, Vehicle and Pedestrian Equipment
• 11 20 00, Commercial Equipment
• 14 20 00, Elevators
• 23 09 00, Instrumentation and Control for HVAC
• 26 27 13, Electricity Metering
• 26 29 00, Low Voltage Controllers
• 28 46 00, Fire Detection and Alarm
• 28 47 00, Mass Notification
The Division 25 contractor must work closely with the prime contractor to develop a detailed responsibility
matrix with the other trades to define the coordination and most cost-effective solutions to achieve the
integration into the unified Siemens Desigo CC platform, referred to at Tyndall AFB as the EMCS.
25 00 00 INTEGRATED AUTOMATION
25 01 00 Operation and Maintenance of Integrated Automation
Integrated Automation data must be collected and transmitted to the analytic engine software to facilitate
the following operational objectives:
• Fault Detection and Diagnostics (FDD): Provide documentation on which analytics rules apply to
the equipment used and include instrumentation required to implement selected FDD rules. The
purpose of the FDD system is to analyze data produced by utility meters and building systems in
order to identify faults, trends, anomalies, and opportunities for improved performance and reduced
energy use in the operation of facility equipment systems.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 25
172 04 November 2019
• CMMS Integration: Coordinate connection to existing TRIRIGA or other CMMS/Enterprise Asset
Management System (EAMS). The integrated automation platform, including FDD module, must
include the capability to both automatically and manually generate work orders in the Tyndall AFB
CMMS or EAMS. The final configuration (automatic or manual) will be determined on a project by
project basis.
• Automatic Notification: The integrated automation platform must provide automatic notification of
detected issues via email as well as automated emailing of reports. The rules and conditions that
trigger automated notification must be created in consultation with Tyndall AFB staff.
The UOC should accommodate operational control of traffic signals and other intelligent transportation
systems (ITS).
Conduit and dedicated 144-strand single-mode fiber must be placed along all reconstructed and new
roadways. Pull boxes will be needed at regularly spaced intervals to access transportation ITS fiber.
25 05 00 Common Work Results for Integrated Automation
The following deliverables are required to be included in the EMCS scope for the integrated subsystems
on each project:
• Floor Plan Graphics: identifying locations of end devices such as temp sensors, VAV controllers,
smoke detectors, and any concealed instrumentation (that is, duct static sensors) for ease of
maintenance.
• Facility Data Archival: providing data storage for integrated data archived and available for use by
the analytics engine with the intervals and storage durations consistent with the type if data being
archived.
• Electronic Records: The EMCS will be used to store and access in electronic form, project
information relevant to the O&M of the facility. Examples include operational technology as-builts,
subsystem schematics, technical data, and O&M manuals.
25 05 11 Cybersecurity for Facility-Related Control Systems
All Facility Related Control Systems (FRCS) must comply with current USAF policy and Unified Facility
Criteria for Cybersecurity of FRCS. The designer should provide a security engineering plan that
describes the security issues related to the facility design and the mitigations needed to reduce the risk
from those issues. The product of the design should be secure FRCS within an AFCEC deployed Civil
Engineer Community of Interest Network Enclave (CE COINE), separated from the Installation’s
enterprise information network, segregated from other FRCS, isolated inherently insecure technologies
(for example, wireless), and providing authorized and authenticated user access. On project completion,
the product to the USAF will be full documentation of the security design in order to develop
implementation and assessment test artifacts sufficient for the USAF to successfully request
Authorizations to Operate under the USAF Risk Management Framework.
NIST SP800-82, Guide to Industrial Control System Security, must be used to clarify technical
requirements of the FRCS design. Systems that support privatized utilities or services must comply with
requirements of DFARS clauses related to Controlled Unclassified Information for Defense Critical
Infrastructure.
DIVISION 25 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 173
Figure 25-1. USAF Platform Enclave Design
25 08 00 Commissioning of Integrated Automation
• Data Driven Owner Acceptance: Coordinate with Owner’s representative and Cx agent at the
beginning of a project to agree on electronic performance validation measures that streamline the Cx
process. Work with prime contractor to modify project execution schedule to achieve early access to
Integrated Automation network to facilitate this objective. See Section 01 91 00, Commissioning.
• Continuous Commissioning: Integrated infrastructure must provide the necessary instrumentation
to transfer data to an analytics engine so operation is continually optimized, and anomalies are
detected.
25 10 00 INTEGRATED AUTOMATION NETWORK EQUIPMENT
The Division 25 contractor must connect newly installed subsystems infrastructure to the dedicated
Integrated Automation network and be responsible for the associated cybersecurity protocols and
authorizations.
Networked fire alarm system must connect to the UL-listed Installation-wide life safety fiber network.
25 13 00 Integrated Automation Control and Monitoring Network
The Division 25 contractor must provide all network hardware, switches, and infrastructure required to
establish connectivity to the Installation-wide integrated automation and fire alarm networks from the fiber
tie-point at the building perimeter.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 25
174 04 November 2019
25 14 00 Integrated Automation Local Control Units
Adherence of all Installation-wide facility systems to industry standard protocol ANSI/ASHRAE 135-2016
BACnet/IP is required to assure protocol and data object interoperability among all system components.
All HVAC controllers, including BACnet zone level Application Specific Controllers, must be IP-based and
connected to the existing Integrated Automation Network.
Each facility must include an informational read-only kiosk for occupants to quickly access energy data,
environmental conditions, and alarm status for major mechanical and electrical systems. Coordinate with
Owner’s Representative and other trades on content and preferred kiosk location to avoid space conflicts
and coordinate rough-ins.
25 15 00 Integrated Automation Software
All integrated data and subsystems delivered through the project will be incorporated into the existing
Installation-wide EMCS, Siemens Desigo CC.
25 30 00 INTEGRATED AUTOMATION INSTRUMENTATION AND
TERMINAL DEVICES
25 35 16 Integrated Automation Sensors and Transmitters
The Division 25 contractor must coordinate with Owner’s Representative and project team to ensure the
following technologies are incorporated to provide for predictive analytics and operational integrity where
needed:
• Leak Detection: Where required to protect critical equipment, detect excessive water flow, or
flooding
• Vibration Monitoring: For critical rotating equipment, for example, central plant, large AHUs
• Corrosion Monitoring: For vessels or equipment affecting critical Installation operations
• Envelope Moisture Monitoring: For buildings
25 36 00 Integrated Automation Instrumentation and Terminal Devices for
Electrical Systems
The Division 25 contractor must coordinate with the prime contractor and their electrical subcontractor to
determine the most cost-effective approach to providing panel level sub-metering to provide as a
minimum separate consumption data for lighting, HVAC, and plug loads. Evaluation should include the
use of SMART electrical equipment integrated directly via BACnet/IP and/or field-installed power meters
connected to the Integrated Automation Network.
The Division 25 contractor must be responsible for acquiring data, which can be accomplished by
integrating with electrical equipment or field installing electrical instrumentation to collect project-defined
electrical data, such as power meters, kilowatt transducers, current sensors, battery monitors, lighting
relays, and UPS monitors.
DIVISION 25 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 175
25 37 00 Integrated Automation Instrumentation and Terminal Devices for
Communications Systems
The Division 25 contractor must coordinate with Owner’s Representative and other trades to identify
locations of audio-visual devices for emergency communications and occupant navigation, avoid space
conflicts, and coordinate rough-ins. These devices require connectivity to EMCS for initiation and
execution of mass notification protocols.
• Mass Notification: Coordinate specific requirements with Tyndall AFB staff.
• Wayfinding: Coordinate specific requirements with Tyndall AFB staff.
25 50 00 INTEGRATED AUTOMATION FACILITY CONTROLS
The Division 25 contractor must provide these additional integrations and SMART system solutions as
part of their scope of supply:
• Video Monitoring: Provide IP-based cameras in electrical and mechanical rooms greater than 150 ft2
for direct connection into the EMCS. Provide door switches at entrances to notify EMCS of occupants
in the space.
• Vertical Transportation: Integrate to elevator equipment to provide status and alarm monitoring.
• Fire Suppression Systems: Integrate to fire alarm system and monitor status from the EMCS.
• Back-up Power Systems: Integrate to generators and fuel oil systems when applicable.
• Whole Building Utilities: Integrate to incoming utilities to monitor whole building consumption of
electric, gas, and water services. Coordinate with prime contractor regarding which trade will provide
the meters required.
• Potable Water Automated Valves: Integrate tank level sensors for water quality optimizing.
The water system will have automated valving, to be controlled from the UOC, which will manage the
drawdown and more efficient use of the water stored in the elevated tanks
25 51 00 Integrated Automation Control of Facility Equipment
All microprocessor-based HVAC equipment (5 tons and greater) and plumbing equipment capable of
BACnet integration must be integrated into the EMCS. Coordinate with mechanical design to ensure
equipment is furnished with necessary communications card/options to provide BACnet connectivity.
When integration is not available, provide necessary field instrumentation to hardwire to DDC system.
25 56 00 Integrated Automation Control of Electrical Systems
All microprocessor-based electrical equipment capable of BACnet integration must be integrated into the
EMCS. Coordinate with electrical design to ensure equipment is furnished with necessary
communications card/options to provide BACnet connectivity. Modbus is an acceptable alternative, but
BACnet is the preferred integration method. All motors 5 HP and greater must require VFDs to be
furnished by the Division 25 contractor or incorporated into a motor control center where applicable.
25 90 00 INTEGRATED AUTOMATION CONTROL SEQUENCES
To be developed on a per-project basis based on facility type and level of complexity.
DIVISION 26 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 177
DIVISION 26 ELECTRICAL
The electrical systems must support Tyndall AFB as an Installation of the Future. Designs must
incorporate resilience, sustainability, and SMART systems focusing on areas of energy efficiency,
appropriate LCCA, mission resiliency, equipment resiliency, mission adaptability, safety, maintainability,
metering, and monitoring and commissioning.
During a service interruption from the public electric utility, electrical energy efficiency is a resiliency
imperative to maximize the performance of limited onsite generation and storage, as further explained in
the Tyndall AFB Performance Standards document. See Division 01, Sustainable and Resilient Design
Requirements, overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 26 work include the following:
• Documentation of accomplishing energy efficiency in design, construction and commissioning must
be provided in accordance with Section 01 33 29, Sustainability and Resiliency Reporting, and
Section 01 91 00, Commissioning.
• UFC 3-301-01, Structural Engineering, must be used with the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements
(USAF, 2019b) used in the structural design for DoD locations and implements the ASCE 7, Minimum
Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures.
• All flood-sensitive equipment including, controls, communications, electrical power supply, meters,
and electrical junction boxes and other connections must be located no lower than the adopted DFE
for Tyndall AFB (USAF, 2019a), or be flood-proofed to an elevation 1 foot above the DFE.
• Equipment must not be located within depressional areas and must be elevated a minimum of 1 foot
above finished grade.
• Future mission adaptability requires providing a minimum of 20% more electrical capacity than code
requirement or initial needs.
26 00 00 ELECTRICAL
26 05 26 Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems
All grounding systems for the electrical service entrances, telecommunication systems, and lightning
protection systems, if applicable, must be bonded together in accordance with NFPA 70. A complete
grounding system for the facilities’ electrical and telecommunications systems must be provided in
accordance with NFPA 70 and Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) 607-D.
26 05 33 Raceway and Boxes for Electrical Systems
Raceways/Conduits
• Raceways/conduits must not be used as a grounding conductor. A copper conductor must be used
for grounding purposes.
• Wireways and similar-type raceways must not be used for wire taps. Taps must be accomplished at
the overcurrent protection terminal or in terminal cabinets, unless preapproved.
• Conduits must be minimum 3/4 inch.
• Exposed PVC conduits and/or electrical metallic tubing (EMT) raceways installed in non-conditioned
spaces and/or exterior applications must not be allowed.
• EMT may be used for concealed (non-exposed) interior circuits. EMT must not be used in poured
concrete walls and/or flooring.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 26
178 04 November 2019
26 20 00 LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION
Low-voltage electrical transmission provides operational flexibility to enhance electric service when the
electric grid is down, allowing critical mission and mission-critical facilities to continue operations.
New and/or upgraded interior facility electrical systems must be designed as required by 40 CFR 433,
UFC 3-501-01, Electrical Engineering; UFC 3-520-01, Interior Electrical Systems; UFC 3-530-01, Design:
Interior, Exterior Lighting and Controls; and the current editions of NFPA 70 and NFPA 101. The electrical
installations must be in compliance with ASHRAE 90.1 and ASHRAE 189.1. Applicable UFGS Division 26
specification sections must be adhered to.
Design package must include drawings, specifications, and design analysis. Design analysis must include
fault study, load study, power loss (including the voltage drop) for each circuit, lighting calculations, and
the electrical equipment data sheets. The voltage drop for each circuit branch must not exceed 3% from
the originating branch circuit panelboard to the last device on the end of the circuit.
Facilities must be analyzed and classified for determination of hazardous location type based on
NFPA 101 and NFPA 70. Electrical systems in hazardous locations must be designed and installed in
compliance with the current NEC Article 500.
26 22 00 Low-Voltage Transformers
Indoor transformers must be dry-type and self-cooled and must not exceed 112.5 kilovolt-ampere (kVA).
Transformers greater than 112.5 kVA must be installed in a transformer room of fire-resistant
construction. Single- and 3-phase transformers must have two copper windings per phase. Full-capacity
standard NEMA taps must be provided in the primary windings of transformers unless otherwise
indicated. Transformers supplying non-linear loads must be UL-listed as suitable for supplying such loads
with a total K-factor not to exceed K-13 and have neutrals sized for 200% of the rated current.
Transformers of 115°C temperature rise must be capable of continuously carrying 115% of their
nameplate kVA without exceeding the insulation rating. Transformers of 80°C temperature rise must be
capable of continuously carrying 130% of their nameplate kVA without exceeding the insulation rating.
26 27 13 Electricity Metering
All facilities must be provided with an electric meter for the electric utility in accordance with AFI 32-1061.
Each electric meter is part of the AMI system and must be connected to the Installation EMCS. The meter
data will be interfaced to the UOC SCADA system via a communications data link. The meter must also
have relay outputs that can be controlled by the SCADA system.
Submetering of lighting, power, and HVAC must be in accordance with ASHRAE 90.1.
26 27 16 Electrical Cabinets and Enclosures
Electrical enclosures must be NEMA 3R for exterior locations, NEMA4X stainless steel for wet or extreme
humidity locations, and NEMA 1 for interior dry locations, unless approved otherwise.
Lighting and power panelboards must conform to NEMA PB-1 and UL 67. Lug and bus must be copper
type. Circuit breakers must conform to NEMA AB-1 and UL 489 and UL 877. Each panel must have a
neatly typewritten directory with the name and/or number of the room or the equipment serviced by each
circuit breaker, which must correspond with the final circuit arrangement. Where spare circuit breakers or
spaces for circuit breakers occur in the directory, the directory must be neatly marked “spare” or “space”
in pencil. Each directory must be mounted in a metallic index cardholder behind a clear plastic window.
DIVISION 26 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 179
26 27 26 Wiring Devices
Standard-use wiring devices must be specifications grade. Wires must be connected to wiring devices by
means of wrapping wires around binding screws or by means of screw-on spring compression-type
connectors for devices with pigtail leads.
Device plates for finished interior walls must match the wall color. Plates for unfinished walls and/or
concealed areas must be stamped metal.
Automatic control of duplex receptacles must be provided in compliance with the requirements of
ASHRAE 90.1. ASHRAE requirements are to automatically turn-off 50% of receptacles in office spaces
and 25% of open office modular systems furniture.
• Specify and use electrical wire and cable with lead content less than 300 parts per million.
• For copper pipe applications, reduce or eliminate joint-related sources of copper corrosion using one
of the following options:
− Use mechanically crimped copper joint systems
− Specify that all solder joints comply with ASTM B828 2002, and specify and use ASTM B813
2010 for flux
For renovation projects, ensure the removal and appropriate disposal of disconnected wires with lead
stabilizers, consistent with the 2002 NEC requirements.
26 29 00 Low-Voltage Controllers
Only copper conductors must be used. The minimum conductor size for use as branch circuits must be
12 AWG, unless approved otherwise. Conductors must be thermoplastic heat- and water-resistant nyloncoated
wire (THHW) or cross-linked heat- and water-resistant insulated wire (XHHW) 75C insulation.
Conductors must be in one piece without splices between connections. Conductors 10 AWG or smaller
must be solid. Conductors connected to control devices, power panelboards, and multipole equipment
(other than single-phase lighting and similar) must be labeled or tagged to reflect the terminal it is
connected to and must correspond with applicable wiring diagram/details.
Table 26-1. Identification of Electrical Power Conductors
IDENTIFICATION OF ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS
Single-phase: 120V/240V Ungrounded = Black, Red
Neutral = White
Grounding = Green
3-phase: 120V/208V Ungrounded, A = Black, B = Red, C = Blue
Neutral = White
Grounding = Green
3-phase: 277V/480V Ungrounded, A = Brown, B = Orange, C = Yellow
Neutral = Gray/white
Grounding = Green
26 30 00 FACILITY ELECTRICAL POWER GENERATING AND
STORING EQUIPMENT
The generator set (genset) will provide emergency power when the grid is down, allowing critical mission
and mission-critical activities to continue. The combination of powering the distribution system and
SMART switches to manage loads must allow the genset to power many operations that do not have their
own backup generators and provide redundancy to locations that have backup generators. A dual-fuel
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 26
180 04 November 2019
genset also serves as a backup power source if local diesel fuel supplies are compromised for the
individual backup generators, thereby providing multiple layers of resiliency.
Natural disasters that affect the Installation may also adversely affect the surrounding region.
Consequently, the Installation may be in competition for the replenishment of diesel fuel for emergency
power generation. Adding diesel storage onsite enhances the Installation’s ability to continue electric
service to critical mission activities in the face of regional fuel shortages.
The generator set, solar PV, and battery energy storage systems must interface with the UOC SCADA
system for monitoring and control functions.
26 31 00 Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Components
PV will provide emergency electric power when the grid is down, allowing critical mission and missioncritical
activities to continue for an extended period. The combination of PV and battery energy storage
systems provide further resiliency and redundancy to the electrical power supply.
26 32 13.13 Diesel-Engine-Driven Generator Sets
Internal combustion engines manufactured after 15 June 2006 must comply with Florida Rule 62-210.300,
F.A.C. / 40 CFR 60, Subpart A/ 40 CFR 60, Subpart IIII/ 40 CFR 60, Subpart ZZZ.
In addition to submittals listed in the UFGS document, if the genset uses compressed air for starting, the
design data for the compressed air starting system must be submitted.
The power rating of the genset will generally be in accordance with NFPA 110 as Level 2, Class 4,
Type 120. Gensets used to power the Tyndall AFB distribution system must be rated as Prime power.
The genset application designation for units used to power the Tyndall AFB distribution system must be
designated as “parallel with other generators on an isolated bus.” The genset application designation for
units used to power individual facilities must be designated as “stand-alone.”
All generator cooling systems must be closed-loop systems and must use air as the final heat sink.
The genset enclosure for outdoor installation must be stainless-steel or marine-grade aluminum for a
marine environment, including wind-blown brackish water. Louvers must be hurricane shutters designed
per wind requirements. Sound attenuation must result in sound levels not to exceed 85 A-weighted
decibels (dBA) at 10 feet from surface of enclosure. The preferred muffler location is inside the enclosure.
Alternatively, the engine-generator set must be enclosed in a structure similar to that described in Naval
Facilities Command (NAVFAC) Marianas Navy and Marine Corps Design and Construction Standards
(September 2017) Emergency Generator Enclosure as shown on Figure 26-1.
DIVISION 26 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 181
Figure 26-1. Emergency Generator Enclosure
Fuel consumption limitations and testing as described in UFGS 26 32 15.00 10 paragraphs 2.1.10,
2.1.11, and 3.6.11 are not applicable. The genset supplier must submit fuel consumption data for 50%,
75%, and 100% of rated output capacity.
The genset design should include a day tank sized for a minimum of 4 hours of operation at full load
without refilling. The unit should also have a main storage tank sized for 7 days of operation at full load
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 26
182 04 November 2019
without refilling. An auxiliary pump must be included to transfer fuel from the main storage tank to the
day tank. Provide a Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure Plan.
Lightning protection for this equipment must adhere to the recommendations and requirements of the
following standards:
• IEEE 142, Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
• IEEE 1410, Guide for Improving the Lightning Performance of Electric Power Overhead Distribution
Lines
• Lightning Protection Institute (LPI) 75, Standard for the Design – Installation – Inspection of Lightning
Protection Systems (2017)
• LPI 177, Inspection Guide for Certified Systems
• NFPA 780, Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems
• UFC 3-575-01, Lightning and Static Electricity Protection Systems
26 32 13.19 Dual-Fuel-Engine-Driven Generator Sets (Stationary, 2 Megawatts)
In general, the duel-fuel genset should adhere to the requirements of UFC 3-540-01, Engine-driven
Generator Systems for Prime and Standby Power Applications, and UFGS 26 32 15.00 10, Diesel-
Generator Set Stationary 100-2500 kW, with Auxiliaries, including the guidelines for UFGS 26 32 15.00
10. This genset is intended to be connected to the Tyndall AFB distribution grid and operate in island
mode or isolated in parallel with other generators on the Tyndall AFB distribution grid.
The unit will be expected to operate on Jet A, instead of diesel fuel, of the same specifications as
delivered to Tyndall AFB for aviation use but with provision for adding any chemicals necessary to meet
the engine manufacturer’s minimum fuel specifications regarding lubricity for equipment wear, especially
the engine fuel pump. The chemical addition unit should be designed to add the chemicals as fuel is
transferred from the genset’s main fuel storage tank to the day tank. In addition, the genset must be able
to operate on a mixture of natural gas and Jet A, with a minimum of 30% natural gas in the mixture. The
genset must be able to shift from 100% liquid fuel to the natural gas/liquid mixture and back without
losing power.
Operational classification of the genset will generally be in accordance with NFPA 110 as Level 2,
Class 4, Type 120. Gensets that will be used to power the Tyndall AFB distribution system must be rated
as prime power. The genset application designation for units used to power the Tyndall AFB distribution
system must be considered to be “parallel with other generators on an isolated bus.”
Fuel consumption limitations and testing as described in UFGS 26 32 15.00 10 paragraphs 2.1.10,
2.1.11, and 3.6.11 are not applicable. Genset supplier must submit fuel consumption data for 50%, 75%,
and 100% of rated output capacity for operating cases of 100% Jet A, 30% natural gas/70% Jet A, 50/50
mixture, and maximum natural gas content allowed mixture.
Depending on the engine manufacturer and the method of mixing the natural gas and liquid fuel, a gas
compressor unit may be required to boost the pipeline gas pressure from a nominal 15 psig to the inlet
pressure required by the engine manufacturer. This unit would consist of a gas compressor (rotary screw
or reciprocating), inlet filter, suction and discharge bottles, and associated controls, all as a skid-mounted
unit. The unit would be protected by an enclosure for outdoor installation, stainless-steel or marine
aluminum, designed for a marine environment, including wind-blown brackish water. Louvers must be
hurricane shutters designed per Miami/Dade County Risk Category 5. Sound attenuation must result in
sound levels not to exceed 85 dBA at 10 feet from the surface of the enclosure. Alternatively, the
compressor unit must be included in the structure for the genset, which would be similar to that described
in NAVFAC Marianas Navy and Marine Corps Design and Construction Standards (September 2017)
Emergency Generator Enclosure as shown on Figure 26-2.
DIVISION 26 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 183
Figure 26-2. Emergency Generator Enclosure
The genset design should include a day tank sized for a minimum of 4 hours of operation on 100% liquid
fuel at full load without refilling. The unit should also have a Jet A main storage tank sized for 7 days of
operation at full load on 100% liquid fuel without refilling. An auxiliary pump must be included to transfer
fuel from the main storage tank to the day tank. The main storage tank with secondary containment
should include truck unloading facilities and appropriate related appurtenances in accordance with UFC
3-460-01, Design of Petroleum Fuel Facilities.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 26
184 04 November 2019
Internal combustion engines manufactured after 15 June 2006 must comply with Florida Rule 62-210.300,
F.A.C. / 40 CFR 60, Subpart A/ 40 CFR 60, Subpart IIII/ 40 CFR 60, Subpart ZZZ.
26 32 33 Battery Storage Systems above 15 kVA Capacity
The Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) must be provided as a package and include batteries,
inverters, and control system(s) as self-contained modular components that can be increased in quantity
and capacity if needed.
The BESS must be charged using solar PV-generated power or grid-supplied power.
The BESS must constantly monitor the Installation’s electrical distribution system, and when required,
inject AC power directly into the distribution grid using protection relays and associated devices.
The BESS must be configured to maximize availability, resiliency, reliability, efficiency, and capacity for
current and future Installation improvements. Active electronic devices must be solid state.
Semiconductor devices must be sealed.
The BESS modules must be weathertight and installed on concrete housekeeping pads above the
Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a). The BESS must be capable of withstanding external environmental
conditions without mechanical or electrical damage or degradation of operating characteristics. These
conditions can include:
• Subtropical heat and rain
• Wind driven dust and debris
• Salt laden atmosphere
• High humidity (100%)
The BESS must be designed to withstand winds of Risk Category V (203 mph).
With full use of auxiliary power requirements, such as for cooling, monitoring, and module lights, the
“round trip” efficiency of the BESS must be no less than 85%.
The following design criteria apply to the BESS:
• Industrial high-grade, lithium-ion batteries or equivalent must have:
− Life-cycle of 20 years and/or 8,000 cycles at a range of 60% discharge rate
− Installed capacity capable of full discharge rate for 60 minutes
− Capable of full recharging within 60 minutes
• Three phase bidirectional power inverters must:
− Be capable of full operation in an ambient temperature range of 35° to 115°F and high humidity
− Have seamless (to grid) charge and discharge modes
− Be capable of no load to full load power output within millisecond range
• All modules must have an independent cooling system (HVAC) as required for the Tyndall AFB
ambient and environmental conditions.
• Battery monitoring system must include a state of charge level output meter.
• The BESS must include an integrated harmonic filter in accordance with standards listed below.
• All equipment must include protection, metering, connections, grounding, and communications (into
Tyndall AFB UOC SCADA system) including all communication links and cabling.
• The auxiliary low-voltage system for powering components, such as modular lighting and HVAC,
must include all necessary transformers, cabling, connections, and lightning protection to BESS
enclosures or buildings.
DIVISION 26 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 185
• BESS must be integrated into the Tyndall AFB electrical distribution network busbars as appropriate
and include an automatic transfer switch.
• The BESS must include security fencing and warning signs around the enclosure(s).
• The transformer(s) must be capable to operate at full power output of the BESS under all
circumstances, including network voltage deviations.
• All DC cabling must be independently earthed and electrically isolated from AC cabling.
• All exposed cables and connectors must be of solar grade, robust, and durable (for the Design Life) in
harsh environmental conditions, including high temperatures, UV radiation, rain, humidity, dirt, and
attack by moss and microbes.
• Enclosure(s) for all equipment as required in the installation of the BESS as described above must
include, but are not limited to:
− Single auxiliary power system to supply electricity to the enclosure(s), if required
− Suitably sized transformers to supply all SCADA, communication, security, lighting,
air-conditioning, and backup systems as required
− Grounding and lightning protection systems
− Integrated SCADA system with fiber optic communication link integrated into the Tyndall AFB
SCADA network and security systems
Lightning protection for this equipment must adhere to the recommendations and requirements of the
following standards:
• IEEE 142, Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
• IEEE 1410, Guide for Improving the Lightning Performance of Electric Power Overhead
Distribution Lines
• LPI 75, Standard for the Design – Installation – Inspection of Lightning Protection Systems (2017)
• LPI 177, Inspection Guide for Certified Systems
• NFPA 780, Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems
• UFC 3-575-01, Lightning and Static Electricity Protection Systems
Related Government References
The following documents are related to the BESS; this is not an all-inclusive list. These documents should
be considered when developing the design of this system:
• UFGS 09 97 13.27, Exterior Coating of Steel Structures
• UFGS 26 32 33.00 10, Battery Storage System Above 15 kVA Capacity
• UFGS 26 41 00, Lightning Protection System
• UFC 3-550-01, Exterior Electrical Power Distribution
• UFC 4-010-06, Cybersecurity of Facility-Related Control Systems
Industry Codes and Standards References
The following sections list the Governmental regulations, industry codes and standards, and industry
guidelines used in the development of these criteria. This list may not be all inclusive and the Design,
Build, Operate, and Maintain (DBOM) entity is responsible to determine if and what additional regulations,
codes, and standards that may apply; and follow these in the completion of the detailed design for the
project. In addition, authorities having jurisdiction over the design, construction, and operation of the
facility must be identified and adhered to these codes and standards set forth the minimum requirements.
These may be exceeded by the Bidder if, in its judgment and with Owner’s acceptance, superior or more
economical designs or materials are available.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 26
186 04 November 2019
The latest edition of the document must apply, unless a specific publication date is noted. The most
severe requirements must prevail in the event of conflict among requirements, specifications, and
applicable and governing codes.
• Institute of Electrical And Electronics Engineers
− IEEE 2030.2.1, Guide for Design of Battery Energy Storage Systems for applications integrated
with Electric Power Systems
− IEEE C57.110, Recommended Practice for Establishing Liquid-Filled and Dry-Type Power and
Distribution Transformer Capability When Supplying Non-Sinusoidal Load Currents (2008)
− IEEE C62.41.1, Guide on the Surges Environment in Low-Voltage (1000 V and Less) AC Power
Circuits (2002; R 2008)
− IEEE C62.41.2, Recommended Practice on Characterization of Surges in Low-Voltage (1000 V
and Less) AC Power Circuits (2002)
− IEEE C37.90, Relays and Relay Systems Associated with Electric Power Apparatus
− IEEE 1613, Environmental and Testing Requirements for Communications Networking Devices
Installed in Electric Power Substations
− IEEE 1686, Substation Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs) Cyber Security Capabilities
− IEEE 1815, Electric Power Systems Communications-Distributed Network Protocol (DNP3)
• National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
− NFPA 70 (ERTA 1-2 2017; TIA 17-1; TIA 17-2), National Electrical Code, Specifically Article 706
(2017I)
• International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
− IEC-60068, Environmental Testing
− IEC-60812, Analysis Techniques for System Reliability – Procedure for Failure Mode and Effects
Analysis (FMEA)
− IEC-62443, Industrial Network and System Security
− IEC-61000-4, Electromagnetic Compatibility
− IEC-61000-6, Electromagnetic Compatibility
− IEC-61850 Series, Communication Networks and Systems for Power Utility Automation
− IEC-62439, Industrial Communications Networks
− IEC-62443 Series, Industrial Network and System Security
− IEC-62351, Power Systems Management and Associated Information Exchange – Data and
Communications Security
• National Institute for Standards And Technology
− NIST SP 800-82, Guide to Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Security
• Underwriters Laboratories
− UL 1449, Standard for Surge Protective Devices
− UL 1741, Standard for Inverters
− UL 9540, Standard for Energy Storage Systems and Equipment
• FBC
− Chapter 16 High-Velocity Hurricane Zone, specifically Sections 1605, 1607, 1611, and 1616-1626
DIVISION 26 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 187
26 40 00 ELECTRICAL AND CATHODIC PROTECTION
26 41 00 Facility Lightning Protection
Lightning protection is normally required for facilities approximately 30 feet or greater in height or arm and
radar facilities. Design of lightning protection systems must consider facility mission and value and
include a calculated risk analysis for areas of uncertainty.
Lightning protection should adhere to the recommendations and requirements of the following standards:
• IEEE 142, Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
• IEEE 1410, Guide for Improving the Lightning Performance of Electric Power Overhead Distribution
Lines
• LPI 175, Standard for the Design – Installation – Inspection of Lightning Protection Systems (2017)
• LPI 177, Inspection Guide for Certified Systems
• NFPA 780, Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems
• UFC 3-575-01, Lightning and Static Electricity Protection Systems
26 50 00 LIGHTING
26 51 00 Interior Lighting
• Light fixtures must be compatible with the Tyndall AFB asset management system, which will be
monitored by the EMCS. Fixture must be intranet enabled to allow for a control device.
• Provide an occupancy sensor capable of dimming the luminaire output from 50% to 100% intensity.
Occupancy sensors must be inter-communication type.
• Each light pole control interface must contain at least one auxiliary port for future connection of a
control device.
• Lighting must be energy-efficient type and concur with the Energy Policy Act of 2005. Lighting
systems to serve facilities/structures must meet the requirements of UFGS 26 51 00 and the
luminaire criteria per the Lighting Plates NL-1 through NL-26.
• Illumination levels must be consistent with current standards as defined by UFC 3-530-01, Design:
Interior, Exterior Lighting and Controls, and the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.
• All facilities must be provided with new LED lighting fixtures. The lighting fixtures must be provided
with solid-state drivers. All drivers must meet with the requirements of NEMA 410.
• For at least 75% of the total connected lighting load, use light sources that have a rated life (or L70
for LED sources) of at least 24,000 hours (at 3 hours per start, if applicable).
• Lighting fixtures must have a correlated color temperature of no greater than 4,100 degrees Kelvin
and a color rendering index of 90. All lighting fixtures must have the same correlated color
temperature. Exceptions include lamps or fixtures specifically designed to provide colored lighting for
effect or other special use.
• Tubular LED (TLED) lamps must not be accepted.
• Use direct-only overhead lighting for 25% or less of the total connected lighting load for all regularly
occupied spaces. Designing spaces with less direct-only overhead lighting helps minimize glare,
reduces the perceived brightness of the direct luminaires, and reduces contrast between ceiling
and luminaire.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 26
188 04 November 2019
• For administration buildings, recess-mounted, direct/indirect lighting fixtures must be used throughout
the facilities, unless otherwise directed. Corridors must have 2-foot-square fixtures, and open office
areas must use either 2-foot by 2-foot or 2-foot by 4-foot fixtures.
• Conference rooms must be provided with a combination of either 2-foot by 2-foot or 2-foot by 4-foot
recess-mounted, direct/indirect LED fixtures and LED downlight fixtures.
• Exit sign lighting fixtures must be energy-efficient, non-visible type LED source.
• Emergency interior and exterior egress lighting and LED exit sign lighting must be provided per
NFPA 101 and UFC 3-530-01, Design: Interior, Exterior Lighting and Controls.
• Lighting control devices must be provided in compliance with the requirements of ASHRAE 189.1 per
UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements. Automatic controls
including daylight harvesting, occupancy sensors, and automatic lighting shut-off systems must be
provided in all spaces in accordance with UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and Sustainable Building
Requirements, and UFC 3-530-01, Design: Interior, Exterior Lighting and Controls. If there are
conflicts between the cited UFCs or requirements herein, the most stringent will apply.
− For all shared multi-occupant spaces (such as conference rooms, classrooms, break areas, and
presentation spaces), meet all of the following standards:
 Have in place multizone control systems that enable occupants to adjust the lighting to meet
group needs and preferences, with at least three lighting levels or scenes (on, off, midlevel).
 Lighting for any presentation or projection wall must be separately controlled.
 Switches or manual controls must be located in the same space as the controlled luminaires.
A person operating the controls must have a direct line of sight to the controlled luminaires.
− For at least 90% of individual occupant spaces including workstations in open office areas,
provide individual lighting controls that enable occupants to adjust the lighting to suit their
individual tasks and preferences, with at least three lighting levels or scenes (on, off, midlevel).
Midlevel is 30% to 70% of the maximum illumination level (not including daylight contributions).
Design teams must install high-frequency control gear to minimize the impacts from flicker on space
users. The following are examples of lighting installations that are considered to contain high-frequency
control gear:
• Fluorescent and gas discharge lighting where the light is controlled by electronic high frequency (only
applicable to existing fixtures to remain)
• LED lighting without dimming
• LED lighting with dimming where dimming occurs through controlling the current
• Incandescent lighting, such as halogen lamps (only applicable to existing fixtures to remain)
All electric lights (except decorative lights, emergency lights and other special-purpose lighting) used in
regularly occupied spaces must meet at least one of the following standards for flicker:
• A minimum frequency of 90 Hz at all 10% light output intervals from 10% to 100% light output
• LED products with a “low risk” level of flicker (light modulation) of less than 5%, especially below
90 Hz operation as defined by IEEE Standard 1789-2015 LED
26 56 00 Exterior Lighting
• All exterior lighting must be LED.
• For street and area pole-mounted lights:
− Fixtures must be completely downward-directed and full cut-off type.
− Light fixtures must be compatible with the Installation asset management system, which will be
monitored at the UOC. Fixture must be intranet-enabled to allow for a control device.
DIVISION 26 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 189
− Light fixtures must have a photocell for dusk-to-dawn operation. They must be compatible with
the existing energy/asset management system. Illumination output must comply with
ASHRAE 90.1 and Illuminating Engineering Society of North America Standard RP-8, Roadway
Lighting Handbook.
− Provide an occupancy sensor at each pole capable of dimming the luminaire output from 0% to
100% intensity in response to the presence or absence of pedestrians, vehicles, or other
forms of occupancy on pedestrian ways or roadways. Occupancy sensors must be
inter-communication type.
− Each light pole control interface must contain at least one auxiliary port for future connection of a
control device.
− The Color Rendering Index must be 80 or higher when not installed in a sea turtle lighting zone.
Lighting Poles and Standards
• Exterior lighting will be designed to withstand winds of Risk Category IV (170 mph).
• Provide separate power and communication chase located within the pole.
Sea Turtle Lighting Requirements
Sea turtle lighting restrictions are applicable within the coastal construction line:
• Minimize all the lights that would be visible from the beach, including all exterior, structural,
decorative, and landscape lighting, as well as lights from pools, fire pits, electronic devices,
televisions, tiki torches, and similar.
• All lighting fixtures must follow the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission guidelines.
https://myfwc.com/wildlifehabitats/wildlife/sea-turtle/lighting/
• Lamps must only be long-wavelength light (560 nanometers or greater): Red LED, Orange LED,
Amber LED types.
Street, Parking Lot, and Pedestrian Lighting
• Visionaire VLX Series
• 19645 Rancho Way, Rancho Dominguez, CA,
90022. (310) 512-6480
• Color: Black
Bollard Lighting
• Visionaire V Bollard Series
• 19645 Rancho Way, Rancho Dominguez, CA,
90022. (310) 512-6480.
• Color: Black
• Lighting output is adjustable to meet sea turtle lighting requirements
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 26
190 04 November 2019
Wall and Stair Lighting
• Vista Lighting
• Color: Dark bronze anodized
• Finish: Smooth
• Model: Aluminum Step and Brick Lights, 5230 round
louvered
• Other: LED Lamp
Monument Lighting
Offers long life in the most demanding environments with low copper content housing materials, stainlesssteel
fasteners, and durable powder coat finish options for coastal regions and natatoriums.
• Hydrel 4750L Static White
• One Lithonia Way, Conyers, GA, 30012.
(800) 705-SERV (7378). www.hydrel.com.
Light Pollution Reduction
For sustainability measures, meet light pollution reduction
standards and provide verification via the following
method(s) for all applicable horizontal and vertical projects:
• Meet uplight and light trespass standards, using either
the backlight-uplight-glare, or “BUG” method (Option 1) or the calculation method (Option 2), as
described below. Projects may use different options for uplight and light trespass. All lighting must
first adhere to the requirements from the US Fish and Wildlife criteria.
• Meet the following standards for all exterior luminaires located inside the project boundary (except
those listed under “Exemptions”):
− The photometric characteristics of each luminaire when mounted in the same orientation and tilt
as specified in the project design
− The lighting zone of the project property (at the time construction begins). Classify the project
under one lighting zone using the lighting zones definitions provided in the Illuminating
Engineering Society and International Dark Sky Association Model Lighting Ordnance (MLO)
User Guide.
• Meet the internally illuminated signage standard.
Uplight Option 1: BUG Rating Method
Do not exceed the following luminaire uplight ratings, based on the specific light source installed in the
luminaire, as defined in IES TM-15-11, Addendum A (listed in Table 26-1).
Table 26-1. Maximum Uplight Ratings for Luminaires
MLO Lighting Zone Luminaire Uplight Rating
LZ0 U0
LZ1 U1
LZ2 U2
LZ3 U3
LZ4 U4
DIVISION 26 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 191
Uplight Option 2. Calculation Method
Do not exceed the percentages of total lumens emitted above horizontal listed in Table 26-2.
Table 26-2. Maximum Percentage of Total Lumens Emitted Above Horizontal, by Lighting Zones
MLO Lighting Zone
Maximum Allowed Percentage of Total Luminaire
Lumens Emitted Above Horizontal
LZ0 U0
LZ1 U1
LZ2 U2
LZ3 U3
LZ4 U4
Light Trespass
Option 1. BUG Rating Method
Do not exceed the luminaire backlight and glare ratings listed in Table 26-3 (based on the specific light
source installed in the luminaire), as defined in IES TM-15-11, Addendum A, based on the mounting
location and distance from the lighting boundary.
Table 26-3. Maximum Backlight and Glare Ratings
Luminaire Mounting
MLO Lighting Zone
LZ0 LZ1 LZ2 LZ3 LZ4
Allowed Backlight Ratings
> 2 mounting heights from lighting boundary B1 B3 B4 B5 B5
1 to 2 mounting heights from lighting boundary and properly
oriented
B1 B2 B3 B4 B4
0.5 to 1 mounting height to lighting boundary and properly
oriented
B0 B1 B1 B3 B3
< 0.5 mounting height to lighting boundary and properly
oriented
B0 B0 B0 B1 B2
Allowed Glare Ratings
Building-mounted > 2 mounting heights from any lighting
boundary
G0 G1 G2 G3 G4
Building-mounted 1–2 mounting heights from any lighting
boundary
G0 G0 G1 G1 G2
Building-mounted 0.5 to 1 mounting heights from any
lighting boundary
G0 G0 G0 G1 G1
Building-mounted < 0.5 mounting heights from any lighting
boundary
G0 G0 G0 G0 G1
All other luminaires G0 G1 G2 G3 G4
The lighting boundary is located at the property lines of the project, or projects, or at the limit of
construction as appropriate. The lighting boundary can be modified under the following conditions:
• When the property line or project boundary is adjacent to a public area that is a walkway, bikeway,
plaza, or parking lot, the lighting boundary may be moved to 5 feet beyond the property line.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 26
192 04 November 2019
• When the property line or project boundary is adjacent to a public street, alley, or transit corridor, the
lighting boundary may be moved to the center line of that street, alley, or corridor.
• When there are additional properties owned by the same entity that are contiguous to the property, or
properties, that the project is within and have the same or higher MLO lighting zone designation as
the project, the lighting boundary may be expanded to include those properties.
• Orient all luminaires less than two mounting heights from the lighting boundary such that the backlight
points toward the nearest lighting boundary line. Building-mounted luminaires with the backlight
oriented toward the building are exempt from the backlight rating standard.
Option 2. Calculation Method
Do not exceed the vertical illuminances at the lighting boundary listed in Table 26-4 (use the definition of
lighting boundary in Option 1). Calculation points may be no more than 5 feet apart. Vertical illuminances
must be calculated on vertical planes running parallel to the lighting boundary, with the normal to each
plane oriented toward the property and perpendicular to the lighting boundary, extending from grade level
to 33 feet above the height of the highest luminaire.
Table 26-4. Maximum Vertical Illuminance at Lighting Boundary, by Lighting Zone
MLO Lighting Zone Vertical Illuminance
LZ0 0.05 FC (0.5 LUX)
LZ1 0.05 FC (0.5 LUX)
LZ2 0.10 FC (1 LUX)
LZ3 0.20 FC (2 LUX)
LZ4 0.60 FC (6 LUX)
Internally Illuminated Exterior Signage
Do not exceed a luminance of 200 candela per square meter (nits) during nighttime hours and 2,000
candela per square meter (nits) during daytime hours.
Exemptions from Uplight and Light Trespass Standards
The following exterior lighting is exempt from the standards, provided it is controlled separately from the
nonexempt lighting:
• Specialized signal, directional, and marker lighting for transportation
• Lighting that is used solely for façade and landscape lighting in MLO Lighting Zones 3 and 4, and is
automatically turned off from 0000 until 0600 hours
• Lighting for theatrical purposes for stage, film, and video performances
• Government-mandated roadway lighting
• Hospital emergency departments, including associated helipads
• Lighting for the national flag in MLO Lighting Zones 2, 3, or 4
• Internally illuminated signage
Provide completed calculations and supporting photometric plans, product cut sheets, and other
supporting materials to the project S+R Coordinator and Tyndall AFB PMO for record.
DIVISION 27 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 193
DIVISION 27 COMMUNICATIONS
The communications systems must support Tyndall AFB as an Installation of the Future. Designs must
incorporate resilience, sustainability, and SMART systems focusing on areas of mission resiliency,
equipment resiliency, future mission adaptability, cyber security, and maintainability. Refer to Division 01
for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product, process, and
documentation requirements.
All flood-sensitive equipment including communications, controls, and electrical power supply equipment
must be located no lower than the adopted DFE for Tyndall AFB, or be flood-proofed to an elevation
1 foot above the DFE.
Equipment must not be located within depressional areas and must be elevated a minimum of 1 foot
above finished grade.
27 00 00 COMMUNICATIONS
Design telecommunications infrastructure to meet the needs of the activity and supporting facilities in
accordance with this document. A/E contractor generated final drawings and specifications for design-bidbuild
and design-build projects must be stamped by a Building Industry Consulting Service International
(BICSI)-Registered Communications Distribution Designer (RCDD).
27 05 00 Outside Plant System (OSP)
27 05 13 OSP Cable
• All cables must be labeled within 3 feet of entering/exiting a maintenance hole (MH) or hand hole
(HH).
• Ensure that a maintenance loop (minimum of 35 feet of cable) is placed in every other MH.
27 05 13.1 Copper Cable
• Copper cable performance specifications for outside plant copper cable are to meet or exceed
specifications identified in Balanced Twisted-Pair Cable Characteristics, Appendix E of the BICSI
Outside Plant Design Reference Manual, 6th edition.
27 05 13.2 Optical Fiber Cable
• Optical fiber performance is to meet current Internatonal Telecommunications Union Standard ITU-T
G.652.D and BICSI Optical Fiber Cable Performance by Type (Table 2.1) in OSP Design Reference
Manual 6th edition or latest version.
• Newly installed Information Transfer Building (ITB) to ITB cables must contain a minimum of 36
single-mode fiber strands.
• New ITB to Edge Building fiber optic cables must contain a minimum of 12 single-mode fiber strands.
• Jetted fiber optic cable (FOC) design may use either traditional “off the shelf” Optical Fiber
Nonconductive Riser (OFNR) loose tube cable or specialized compact jacketed FOC depending on
the design of the micro-duct pathway being used. Both are acceptable.
27 05 13.3 Tracer Wire
• Tracer wires must be installed between manholes (new or existing) with new duct bank runs or new
cables when installed in existing assets.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 27
194 04 November 2019
27 05 28 OSP Pathways
27 05 28.1 Underground Pathways
• Jetted Micro-Duct Systems (JMDS) are the preferred method of new underground pathway.
• JMDS may be added to Maintenance Hole Duct Systems (MHDS) rather than innerducts when space
is available.
• JMDS spans must not exceed 2,000 feet in length without entry into an above ground enclosure, MH
or HH
• All bell and pistol constructed conduits must be 4-inch Schedule 40 PVC.
• Bell and pistol conduit spans must not exceed 400 feet length without entry into an aboveground
enclosure, MH or HH.
• New MHDS conduit installation must provide 2 by 4-inch Schedule 40 PVC conduits.
• When copper cable is unavoidably a part of an OSP technical solution to meet requirement 4 by
4-inch Schedule 40 PVC conduits.
• EBs must be connected to an ITB by a single cable route and entry conduit.
• Each ITB must be connected to at least two other ITBs via physically diverse (separated by a
minimum of 40 feet) cable routes, where physical diversity starts at the end of the entry conduit when
direct buried or at the first manhole after leaving a building if the manhole is within 50 feet of the
building.
• All new conduit installed must transition into the HH or MH at a depth of 36 inches or more below the
top cover depth.
• All duct openings from newly installed duct, duct with new geotextile fabric innerduct and duct with
new tracer wire must be sealed.
• ITB-to-ITB physically diverse cables and conduits installed within 40 feet of each other must have a
concrete cap.
• Reuse or new conduit feeding a MH or HH located beyond 50 feet and servicing an ITB or critical end
building must be have a concrete cap or enclosed with a concrete encasement.
• The concrete cap must be 10 inches above the top of the duct.
• The concrete cap must be a minimum of 4 inches in thickness, 8 inches wider on both sides than the
protected duct(s) and 22 inches below the earth's surface.
• A minimum of one caution tape must be installed at minimum depth of 6 inches above the installed
concrete cap.
• For trenches under asphalt and concrete surfaces, new conduit must be encased within 3,000 psi
concrete.
• For intersection of ITB cable conduits, new conduits must be exposed 6 feet from the intersecting
point and 3,000 psi concrete poured 10 feet to either side of the intersection at a depth of 1 foot
above the top of the conduits and 1 foot below the bottom of the conduits.
• For building entrance conduits that have the closest manhole beyond 50 feet of the building exterior,
there must be a 1-foot 3,000-psi concrete encasement around the outside perimeter of new conduit.
27 05 28.2 Direct Buried Pathways
• Direct Buried (DB) cable is an alternative to MHDS only with proper justification and appropriate
levels of Installation approval. DB will only be used in low traffic areas of an installation campus or
cantonment area.
• Fiber optic cable (FOC) installed by direct burial must be of armored design.
DIVISION 27 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 195
27 05 28.3 Directional Boring
• The use of boring technologies combined with the installation of roll pipe (HDPE standard inside
diameter 11) to cross under roads and parking lot surfaces may be used only with proper justification
and appropriate levels of Installation approval.
• Sleeveless or uncased boring (placing fiber directly in a bore without use of roll pipe or duct) must not
be used.
27 05 28.4 Innerduct
• The installation of flexible geotextile multiple-cell innerduct is the preferred method of innerduct
installation.
• Standard rigid - inch innerduct may be substituted only when situations do not allow for the
installation of a geotextile multiple-cell innerduct.
• Geotextile multiple-cell innerduct must be designed for the following installations:
− Use as a two-cell innerduct system installed in a 2-inch conduit
− Use as a single, three-cell innerduct system (with or without a factory installed tracer wire)
installed within a 4-inch conduit
− Use as a three, three-cell innerduct system (one three cell with a tracer wire and other two
without tracer wire) installed within a 4 inch conduit
27 05 29 OSP Spaces
27 05 29.1 Maintenance Holes/Hand Holes
• MH and HH enclosures must be manufactured and installed to meet ASTM design and installation
practices and manufacturer’s installation recommendations.
• MH size must be 6 foot by 8 foot by 7 foot.
• HH size must be 3 foot by 5 foot by 4 foot.
• MH and HH must have factory installed knockouts for duct penetrations.
• Duct penetrations into an existing MH or HH must either enter through an existing knockout or via a
core drilled in the wall.
• MH or HH that supports a new conduit and building entrance must be located within 50 feet of the
building entrance.
• A new concrete MH or HH and associated hardware must have the following:
− Round cast iron cover/ring full sized, galvanized hinged lids, rated for roadway traffic, and sized
to accommodate the full build-out of the duct system.
− Industry standard covers, collars, and associated hardware. While these covers are not required
to be lockable, they are required to be to accept industry standard compliant lockable covers that
may be installed in the future.
• Bell housing conduit connectors installed flush to the concrete walls must be installed and all voids (in
the concrete walls) created by the installation of duct are required to be sealed with concrete.
• Cable rack and steps must be installed to support cable routed in MHs and HHs and for supporting
cable slack coils.
27 05 29.2 Pedestals, Cabinets and Above Ground Enclosures
• To avoid additional confined spaces on campus, above ground termination cabinets/pedestals are
acceptable alternative to buried maintenance hole design.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 27
196 04 November 2019
• Above ground termination cabinets/pedestals should be of low profile design and allow adequate
space for JMDS junctions.
27 05 30 OSP Splicing and Termination Hardware
• Terminate OSP cable with metallic/conductive members on a protected entrance terminal (PET).
• Terminate the copper backbone cable originating in the main Telecommunications Room (TR) or
main cross-connect in each TR on 110-type, insulation-displacement wiring blocks mounted on the
backboard.
• Provide 110-type terminal blocks on the same backboard as the PET and in each TR for copper
backbone distribution.
• OSP cable runs must use continuous fibers with no intermediate patches or cross connects.
• OSP continuous cable runs must use fusion splices.
• OSP continuous cable runs must not use mechanical splices.
• Weather-proof fiber optic splice case enclosures must be used for OSP applications (manhole,
handhole) and for building basements which have damp environments.
• Direct buried and aerial splices must not be installed.
• All cables entering and leaving splice cases must be labeled within 3 feet of the splice case.
• Use a non-bonded splice case for the transition from OSP rated cable to interior rated cable.
27 05 33 OSP Grounding and Bonding
• Comply with NFPA 70 for grounding and bonding requirements for exposed cable.
• Connect all metallic shields and strength members for outside plant cable entering a building to the
electrical service grounding electrode system with a No. 6 AWG or larger ground wire.
• Terminate all incoming OSP copper cables on UL-listed primary protector blocks, located within the
building entrance terminal cabinet. Provide protector blocks equipped with 5-pin solid state, gas, or
hybrid protector modules for the number of pairs terminated.
27 05 35 OSP Commissioning
• All installed backbone and horizontal telecommunications cabling and connecting hardware must
meet minimum performance requirements and be tested in accordance with TIA-568-C. Provide
report of all tests results and certifications to the proponent and telecommunications manager upon
completion.
• All unshielded twisted pair (CAT6) cabling and connecting hardware must be tested. Perform all
required testing to ensure minimum performance requirements are met in accordance with
ANSI/TIA/EIA-568-C.2.
• All fiber optic cabling and connecting hardware must be tested. Perform all required testing to ensure
minimum performance requirements are met in accordance with TIA-568-C.1 for cabling and TIA-
568-C.3 for connecting hardware.
• All coaxial cabling and connecting hardware must be tested. Perform all required testing to ensure
minimum performance requirements are met in accordance with TIA-568-C.4.
• The contractor must submit for Government review a draft test plan of all proposed cabling and
equipment being installed.
• After the contractor has completed the installation and testing of the ITS, the contractor must submit a
test report for all fiber and copper cabling. The contractor’s RCDD must approve both the test plan
and the test report before submitting to the government.
DIVISION 27 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 197
• The test plan must include, along with all testing system reports, a complete project test summary
spreadsheet with indexed room numbers, outlet labels, jack labels and the pass/fail status, and
causes for failures along with a total number of outlets installed, jacks/cable runs installed and the
total number of jacks/cables runs that passed and failed the tests.
• All failed tests require the contractor to correct the failures prior to turnover of the system. Tier 2
testing, data, analysis is required by the government at the contractors’ expense if Tier 1 testing does
not prove adequate for identifying causes of failures, and if the government is responsible for paying
for any repairs not within the original scope of contract.
27 10 00 STRUCTURED CABLING SYSTEM
27 10 05 Telecommunication/Equipment Rooms
• Telecommunications Entrance Facility (EF)
− The EF is defined as the space housing the point of entrance of the telecommunications service,
as well as the space where the inter-building backbone and intra-building backbone facilities join.
• Telecommunications Room (TR)
− A TR is defined as an architectural space designed to contain telecommunications equipment,
cable terminations, and cross connect cabling.
− The TR contains the telecommunications equipment for connecting the horizontal cabling to the
backbone cabling system.
− The TR may also function as the telecommunications EF.
• Equipment Room (ER)
− An ER is defined as an architectural, environmentally controlled, centralized space for
telecommunications equipment that usually houses a main or intermediate cross-connect.
− All or any subset of the functions of a TR or EF may be provided by an ER.
• Work Area
− A work area is defined as the building space where the occupants interact with the
telecommunication terminal equipment.
27 10 05.1 Communications Entrance Facility
• The EF houses the Building Entrance Terminal, which is the demarcation point between the OSP
cabling and the inside plant distribution cabling.
• Per the NEC, non-building rated OSP cable entering a building must transition to inside rated cable
within 50 feet from the building entrance. This applies to all OSP cable.
• For OSP rated cable that must extend distances greater than 50 feet from the entrance point into the
building, the cable must be continuously enclosed in a rigid or an intermediate metal conduit.
• Aboveground building entry (AGBE) must consist of the following infrastructure attached to the
building exterior wall:
− Exposed, UV rated, Schedule 80, PVC conduits
− An exterior rated NEMA 3 or better pull box
− All mounting hardware be of the same finish, manufacturer, length and installed at uniform
distances
− Installation of a wall penetration and conduit sleeve through the building exterior wall
• Silicon must be installed to all of the following points of the building’s exterior surface:
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 27
198 04 November 2019
− All penetrations, including bolt holes and conduit penetrations
− All seams at surface mounted materials; including where exterior rated pull box meets the wall
− All materials identified in this section be constructed from a paintable material and be installed
plumb, level, sealed, and with measures taken to ensure all work performed to the building’s
exterior surfaces is water tight
• In the installation of a new AGBE the quantity and size of the conduit or roll pipe entering the AGBE
must equal the amount leaving the AGBE and penetrating the building exterior wall.
• A subterranean building entry (SBE) must be the preferred method, pending Base Area Network
design, of building entrance installation. A SBE must include:
− Access to the lowest floor space immediately inside the building’s exterior wall
− The ability to core drill the floor of this space
− The installation of conduit end 4 inches above finished floor
− Concrete to seal the space around the conduit penetration
− The anchoring of conduit into place
27 10 05.2 Grounding and Bonding
• Comply with NFPA 70 for grounding and bonding requirements. Provide a telecommunications
bonding and grounding system in accordance with TIA-607-C or current version.
• Bond all telecommunications racks and supporting metallic structures (cable trays, ladders, conduits
and baskets). Non-continuous distribution systems (such as stub-ups or J-hooks) do not require
bonding.
• Telecommunications main grounding busbar must be predrilled, wall-mounted, rectangular bars of
hard-drawn solid copper, 1/4 by 4 inches in cross section, length as determined by electrical
requirements.
• The busbar must be listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory for use as
telecommunications main grounding busbar and must comply with TIA-607-C.
27 10 05.3 Architectural and Environmental Considerations
• There must be at least one TR or ER per floor.
• Multiple rooms may also be required if the horizontal cable length (including slack) exceeds 295 feet.
• Size ERs in accordance with TIA-568.2-D. Size each TR in accordance with TIA-568.2-D, except that
the minimum TR size for DoD buildings is 10 feet x 8 feet.
• TRs for each serving area can be no larger than 10,000 sf as stipulated in TIA- TIA-568.2-D.
• Provide adequate space in TRs to facilitate tenant owned data and telecommunications systems, and
other low voltage systems such as fire alarm, cable television, closed-circuit television, and electronic
security systems.
• Provide backboards in accordance with TIA-569-D. Backboards must be fire-retardant-treated wood,
bearing the manufacturer’s stamp. If painted, the manufactures fire rated stamp must remain visible.
Cover a minimum of two adjacent walls with backboards.
• Design telecommunication spaces to meet the HVAC requirements of TIA-569-D, including the
Class B requirements for temperature and humidity as outlined in ASHRAE TC 9.9.
27 10 05.4 Communications Electrical Protection
• Provide protected terminals in accordance with TIA-758-B.
• Equip protected terminals with modules to protect the inside plant cabling and equipment from power
surges.
DIVISION 27 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 199
• Provide 110-type Insulation Displacement Connector (IDC) terminal blocks or cable stubs.
27 10 05.5 Communications Cabinets, Racks, Frames, and Enclosures
• Provide 19 inch floor-mounted equipment racks located at or near the center of the
telecommunication spaces.
• Provide a minimum of 36 inches space both in front and back of the rack, measured from the
equipment.
• Provide a minimum side clearance of 24 inches on at least one end of the rack or row of adjacent
racks.
• Provide a minimum of 24-inch-wide cabinets with cooling fans and internal rails to support 19 inch
equipment.
• Provide a minimum space of 36 inches, both in front and back of the cabinet, and a minimum side
clearance of 24 inches on at least one end of the cabinet or row of adjacent cabinets.
27 10 05.6 Communications Termination Blocks and Patch Panels
• For copper patch panels, use 8-position, 8-contact (8P8C) modular jacks, with rear mounted 110-type
IDC terminations, CAT6 rated for the unshielded twisted pair (UTP) system being installed.
• Provide modular jacks that conform to the requirements of TIA-568.2-D, rated for use with the
installed cable plant.
• Use duplex LC connectors on 19-inch rack mounted panels, unless otherwise directed.
• Provide a 3-foot slack loop of fiber within each panel; include strain relief for cables within the panel.
• Provide proper termination, splice storage, routing, radius limiting, cable fastening, storage, and
cross-connection in all patch panels.
• Fiber Optic Distribution Panel (FODP) must be wall-mount or rackmount depending on its location.
• Fiber optic pigtail assemblies must be factory made pigtail fiber optic cable assemblies with one end
blunt (splice end) and the other end with factory terminated connectors.
• Fiber optic pigtail assemblies must be manufactured with the same cable type, performance
characteristics as the installed cable to which it is splicing.
• FODP size must be 1 through 4 RU.
• New FODPs must be from the same original equipment manufacturer as reused existing FODPs.
27 10 05.7 Communications Cable Management and Ladder Rack
• Install horizontal cable management panels above and below each patch panel.
• The required ratio of horizontal cable management to patch panels is 1:1.
• Provide vertical cable management between racks and at the end of racks when required to protect,
manage, and organize cables.
• Vertical cable management panels should be a minimum of 6 inches wide.
27 10 20 Communications Pathways
• For intra-building backbone distribution, provide a minimum of two 4-inch conduits between TRs
located on the same floor or pathway that provides equivalent capacity (for example, the cable tray
installed to support the backbone and horizontal distribution).
• In multistory buildings, provide a minimum of three 4-inch conduits, sleeves, or an equivalent sized
slot between stacked TRs on successive floors in accordance with TIA-569-D or current version.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 27
200 04 November 2019
27 10 20.1 Conduits and Backboxes for Communications Systems
• Design conduit systems in accordance with TIA-569-D.
• Install EMT conduit from the cable backbone distribution system, whether cable tray or enclosed duct,
to each outlet unless a conduit-less system is approved by the telecommunications manager.
• Provide a minimum of 1-inch EMT conduit for standard outlets.
• When cable tray or enclosed duct is not used, install individual conduits from the TR to each outlet.
• Coordinate conduit bend radii with cable bend radius.
• Do not use flexible metal conduit for telecommunications wiring except when installing floor-access
boxes in a raised floor, where the floor-access box may be relocated within a specified service area.
In this case the length of the flexible metal conduit must not exceed a length of 20 feet for each run
per TIA-569-D or current version.
• If an in-slab or below grade conduit system is used in the telecommunications design, comply with
NFPA 70 and use cables that are listed and rated for wet locations.
• Use an optimal conduit fill ratio of 40% for conduit sizing. Do not exceed a fill ratio of 50%.
• Place pull and splice boxes in conduit runs in accordance with TIA-569-D or current version.
27 10 20.2 Cable Trays for Communications Systems
• The DoD-required horizontal pathway is a ceiling distribution system employing a centralized cable
tray system originating in the telecommunications space and continuing out into the serving areas.
• Use cable trays for horizontal distribution to the maximum extent possible (80 to 90% of the horizontal
cable length).
• The remaining pathway to the work area outlet may be implemented in a variety of ways combining
conduit, non-continuous cable supports, and stub-ups/outs.
• Use solid bottom, slotted bottom, or welded wire cable trays to provide a centralized cable
management/distribution system.
• Design cable trays to accommodate an initial calculated fill ratio of 25%
• The maximum fill ratio of any cable tray is 50%. (Note: This allows for future growth within the cable
tray. Due to random placement of cables and space between the cables, a 25% fill ratio means that in
reality the tray is half filled.)
• The maximum fill depth of any cable tray is 6 inches.
• Provide and maintain a minimum of 12 inches of access headroom above a cable tray system or
cable runway.
27 10 20.4 Hangers and Supports for Communications Systems
• The use of “J” hooks, flexible cable tray(s), and alternative support systems specifically certified for
the cable used is permissible to support cable extensions from the cable tray.
• Do not exceed a 50% fill ratio for the “J” hooks.
• Support must be provided for horizontal cabling to distribution areas in cable tray(s).
• Non-continuous cable supports are not allowed in the following locations:
− In place of the cable tray system or as the sole distribution system in place of home-run conduit.
Design non-continuous cable supports to support the category-rating of the cable. Supports must
not exceed 20 cables or 50% of the fill capacity, whichever is less.
− That exceed 50 feet total length through a non-continuous cable support system.
− Ceilings in which Infection Control protocol affects ceiling tile removal
DIVISION 27 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 201
− In areas where the cable must be protected.
− When using non-continuous cable supports, provide in accordance with TIA-569-D or current
version
27 10 20.5 Sleeves and Sleeve Seals for Communications Pathways and Cabling
• Duct seals must be installed in all ends of any newly installed conduits.
• Duct seals must be installed in the ends of all existing conduits where new cabling is installed.
• Duct seals must be installed in innerducts if conduit contains new or reuse innerduct.
• If multicell fabric innerduct is installed, the manufacturer installation instructions must be followed for
cutting and coiling geotextile ends, for tying off pull strings, and for the installation of duct seal.
• Firestop materials must be installed on both sides of an interior wall and all floor penetrations,
including any remaining space within conduits, sleeves, per established industry standards including
the NEC, NESC, and NFPA.
27 10 30 Communications Backbone Distribution System
27 10 30.1 Communications Copper Backbone Cabling
• Provide multi-pair voice backbone cable that meets the requirements of Insulated Cable Engineers
Association S-80-576 and TIA-568.2 D for riser-rated UTP cable.
• Use solid untinned copper, No. 24 AWG conductors.
• For facilities that will use unified communications (that is, voice, video, and data over Internet Protocol
(IP), provide a minimum 25-pair copper backbone to each TR. Provide additional cable counts to
support actual legacy system requirements.
• For facilities using legacy systems, provide copper backbone cables sized to support no more than
1.5 pairs for every outlet connected to the serving TR.
27 10 30.2 Communications Optical Fiber Backbone Cabling
• The minimum cable size between closets must be 6 strands.
• Single-mode cable must be minimum of OS1.
• Multimode cable must be OM3.
27 10 40 Communications Horizontal Distribution System
27 10 40.1 Communications Copper Horizontal Cabling
• Horizontal cable and its connecting hardware provide the means of transporting signals between the
telecommunications outlet/connector and the horizontal cross-connect located in the communications
equipment room. This cabling and its connecting hardware are called a ”permanent link,” a term that
is used in the testing protocols.
• Horizontal distribution cable must be four-pair UTP, CAT 6, with 100 ohm impedance.
• Horizontal distribution cable must meet performance specifications as identified TIA/EIA-568.4 D or
current version.
27 10 40.2 Communications Optical Fiber Horizontal Cabling
• Cabling must meet or exceed the manufacturer’s specifications and ANSI/TIA-568.4 D, Optical Fiber
Cabling Components Standards, to include cable transmission performances, minimum cable bend
radius, and cable pull strength/pull tensions.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 27
202 04 November 2019
27 10 45 Work Area Cabling
27 10 45.1 Communications Faceplates and Outlet
• Provide single gang, four position, modular faceplate for each work area outlet.
• Standard configuration is two RJ-45 modular jacks and two blanks for future applications.
• Provide unkeyed CAT6 modular jacks in accordance with TIA-568.2-D.
• Provide unkeyed duplex LC connectors and adapters in accordance with TIA-568.2-D.
• Terminate fiber optic cabling at both ends using duplex LC connectors.
27 10 48 Cable Splicing and Terminations
27 10 48.1 Communications Copper Cable Splicing and Terminations
• Cable connecting hardware must comply with TIA/EIA-568.4 D, IDC type, with modules designed for
punch-down caps or tools.
• Cables must be terminated with connecting hardware of same category or higher.
27 10 48.2 Communications Optical Fiber Splicing and Terminations
• Fiber optic splicing must be fusion splicing.
• The splicing of all fiber strands must use the fiber optic color code standard ensuring all fiber strands
are kept in a straight-through configuration through the splice.
• Indoor rated fiber optic splice case enclosures must be used for wall-mounted and rack-mounted
applications.
• Field terminated fiber optic connectors must conform to TIA-568.2-D.
• Field terminated fiber optic connector insertion loss must be 0.25 dB maximum.
• Field terminated fiber optic connectors must conform to TIA/EIA-455-21 connector durability with a
maximum insertion loss change not to exceed 0.3 dB after 200 insertions.
• Field terminated fiber optic connectors must conform to TIA/EIA-604-3 intermateability standards.
• Comply with TIA/EIA-606-A and UL 969 for labeling materials, including label stocks, laminating
adhesives, and inks used by label printers.
27 10 50 Specialty Distribution Systems
27 10 50.2 Cable Television, Closed-Circuit Television Communications
• Use either a 75-ohm broadband quad-shield coaxial cable or single-mode fiber optic cable system.
• Provide plenum cables as required in accordance with NFPA 70, UFC 3-600-01, Fire Protection
Engineering for Facilities.
• Provide a TIA-568.2-D and NFPA 70 compliant system.
• System must operate within the 5 to 1000-Megahertz (MHz)bandwidth using 1,000 MHz passive
devices and a minimum of 750 MHz active devices. Provide a minimum signal level of 0 decibel
millivolts (dBmV) (1,000 microvolts) and a maximum of 15 dBmV at 55 and 750 MHz at each outlet.
• For coaxial systems less than 295 feet from headend equipment to the TR, or from TR to TR, provide
RG-11 coaxial trunk cable.
• Use RG-6 coaxial cables for drops from the TR (or headend) to the wall outlet. Do not use RG-59.
DIVISION 27 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 203
27 10 60 Radio Frequency Systems
27 10 60.1 Wireless Access Points
• Provide two twisted-pair cables, CAT6 or CAT6A terminated on standard 8-pin modular connectors or
two fiber multimode optical fiber strands, OM3 or higher for each wireless access point.
• Include the cable tray and conduit or J-hooks to support the cable connected to the WAP.
27 10 60.5 Cellular Systems
• LTE/5G wireless access via active or passive repeater systems must be included within building
designs.
DIVISION 28 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 205
DIVISION 28 ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY
The electronic safety and security systems must support Tyndall AFB as an Installation of the Future.
Designs must incorporate resilience, sustainability, and SMART systems focusing on areas of mission
resiliency, equipment resiliency, mission adaptability, safety, maintainability, and monitoring. Refer to
Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements.
All flood-sensitive equipment including controls, communications and electrical power supply equipment
must be located no lower than the adopted DFE for Tyndall AFB, or be flood-proofed to an elevation 1
foot above the DFE.
Equipment must not be located within depressional areas and must be elevated a minimum of 1 foot
above finished grade.
28 40 00 LIFE SAFETY
28 46 00 Fire Detection and Alarm
The overall intent of these guidelines is to provide a robust fire alarm and mass notification system for
each facility efficiently. Reliability of the design should be informed by these guidelines for the specific
local hazard associated with high winds and flood waters, as well as maintaining compliance with the
UFC. Where allowable, systems should include contacts allowing for monitoring of resource usage in
support of various SMART goals and technologies.
• Fire alarm control panels must be located above design flood level.
• The fire alarm system must be zoned so areas above the design flood level are isolated from areas in
the design flood level.
• All electrical power for fire alarms must be protected by an arc flash limiter (AFL), to include feeders,
transformers, switchgear, and distribution panels.
• Emergency power supply for fire alarm systems must be located above the design flood level,
including batteries, switchgear, and breakers.
• Fire alarm and mass notification to be coordinated with existing Installation system.
• Fire alarms must be connected to the UOC. Coordinate with Division 25, Integrated Automation.
28 47 00 Mass Notification
• Mass notification control panels must be located above the design flood level.
• Mass notification system must be zoned so areas above the design flood level are isolated from
areas in the design flood level.
• All electrical power for mass notification must be an AFL, to include feeders, transformers,
switchgear, and distribution panels.
• Emergency power supply for mass notification systems l must to be located above the design flood
level, including batteries, switchgear, and breakers.
• Fire alarm and mass notification must be coordinated with existing Installation system.
• Coordinate with Division 25, Integrated Automation.
DIVISION 31 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 207
DIVISION 31 EARTHWORK
31 00 00 EARTHWORK
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 31 work include the following:
• Protect Soil Health: The project team must work with the S+R Coordinator to plan and document the
following:
− Approach to limiting the area that is disturbed by development activities. The limits of disturbance
protect special/sensitive landscape features, and stay within NEPA boundaries.
− Limits of disturbance are marked by survey stakeout and delineated with temporary fencing.
− 10% of post-construction vegetated areas disturbed during construction are restored for
appropriate soil type, structure, and function to support healthy plant and tree growth.
• Grading, Drainage, and Earthwork Balance: The following principles guide grading and drainage
design:
− Building finished floor elevation, critical outdoor equipment and sensitive infrastructure must meet
the Tyndall AFB DFE criteria (USAF, 2019a).
− Provide required stormwater management compliance temporary storage volume.
− Provide required cover over utilities.
− Consider earth berms as mitigation and redirection of wind velocity.
− Without violating any of the higher priority standards listed, seek to balance earthwork volumes
within the contract boundaries. Coordinate with the PMO regarding anticipated soil borrow or
excess disposal standards.
All earthwork must be in compliance with the recommendations of geotechnical engineering,
environmental, and other relevant reports, as well as OSHA safety guidelines.
Earthwork must be completed in a manner to maintain or improve infiltration rates of the final site.
Coordinate soil preparation for planting with the guidelines in Section 32 90 00, Planting.
Stockpile topsoil separately from subsoil. Limit topsoil stockpile height to less than 5 feet.
DIVISION 32 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 209
DIVISION 32 EXTERIOR IMPROVEMENTS
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 32 work include the following:
• Comply with the Environmentally Preferred Products requirements of UFC 1-200-02, High
Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements
• Landscape irrigation
• Paving materials
• Site improvements
• Stormwater management
Coordinate with Section 10 70 00, Exterior Specialties, for exterior improvements related to buildings,
including flood-proofing.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
CSI Division 32 does not include an overall topic for stormwater management, only individual constructed
components such as pipes and inlets. Although this Division is not a perfect location for the consolidated
criteria and clarifications, Division 32 was selected as a prominent location that will be frequently
referenced by civil engineers and landscape architects.
The stormwater drainage and treatment system serving the Rebuild Tyndall program are required to
comply with multiple state (where more stringent) and federal permits and design standards, including:
• FDEP F.A.C. 62-330, Environmental Resource Permitting
• FDEP F.A.C. 62-624, Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) Permit
• Section 438 of the Energy Independence and Security Act (2007), Storm Water Runoff Requirements
for Federal Development Projects
Functionally, the stormwater system prevents flooding of buildings, facilities, and roadways during design
storms up to and including the design storm that was selected for the purposes of the stormwater system
design and as required to meet the Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a). Site flooding may still occur if
severe weather events result in rainfall, tidal, or surge events beyond the design basis. Site grading and
building elevation criteria will ensure that runoff is draining away from buildings during all events.
State and Federal requirements mandate mitigation of the harmful effects of stormwater runoff on
downstream receiving waters, through vegetated filtering, soil infiltration, and other water quality
best practices.
There is a competing requirement imposed by proximity to the airfield that all surface ponding be
designed to dissipate within 48 hours to minimize the Bird and Animal Strike Hazard for aircraft in
accordance with FAA AC 150/5320-5D Airport Drainage Design, AC 150/5200-33B Hazardous Wildlife
Attractants On or Near Airports, and Air Force Pamphlet 91-212 Bird/Wildlife Aircraft Strike Hazard
(BASH) Management Program. The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
Balancing Airport Stormwater and Bird Hazard Management (2015) contains additional design
suggestions for reducing the attractiveness of stormwater management facilities to wildlife.
Stormwater Quality
Project teams are encouraged to exceed UFC 3-210-10, Low-Impact Development, for minimum
requirements for improved environmental performance.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 32
210 04 November 2019
Stormwater Quantity
Impacts on runoff rates and volumes must be considered as a key component of site design. Project
teams must evaluate and use as appropriate stormwater management design strategies including:
• Design to minimize impervious surfaces; when and where practical. Specify permeable materials as
alternatives for hard surfaces. Coordinate with Section 32 12 00, Flexible Paving; Section 32 13 00,
Rigid Paving; and Section 32 14 00, Unit Paving.
• Design hard surfaces to drain into localized, onsite landscape areas, and design landscape areas to
accept precipitation runoff from hard surfaces.
• Emphasize sheet flow and multiple small outfalls of concentrated flow over to a central conveyance
system.
• Provide infiltration opportunities in the landscape that use plants and healthy soils as filters, such as
bioswales, raingardens, water quality dry ponds, constructed wetlands, or vegetated buffers, that
filter, infiltrate, evapotranspirate, and retain precipitation, recharge groundwater, and reduce pollutant
loadings, runoff volumes, and rates.
• Where runoff conveyance systems are needed, use vegetated channels when possible. Give
preference to the use of turf reinforcement matting or other reinforced vegetated surface technologies
instead of hard armor ditches when the designs require greater erosion resistance. Where vegetated
channels are not practical, the use of hard, non-erosive materials to convey surface water should take
precedence over using pipes or culverts.
• Create living landscapes using soil and vegetation features, such as vegetated walls, or facades;
raingardens; or tree canopies.
• Select appropriate vegetation features that can tolerate periodic inundation and soil saturation without
harming the growth or vigor of the plant.
• When selecting vegetation for managing precipitation runoff, select plants that are resistant or less
susceptible to pollutants commonly found in precipitation runoff.
• Where possible, select plants appropriate for the site and climate based on their capacity to reduce
pollutant loadings for specific pollutants of concern in the receiving watershed.
• Improve the water-retention capacity of the soil by increasing the organic matter content of the soil by
adding compost or other organic soil amendments.
• Use rainwater-harvesting systems to reduce precipitation runoff volumes and rates. Design rainwater
harvesting and use systems to maintain the ecological flows of receiving waters and historical
groundwater recharge rates. As a resiliency measure, rainwater harvesting systems is recommended
as an alternate non-potable localized water supply. Coordinate with Section 22 14 53, Rainwater
Harvesting.
• Avoid or minimize the use of materials used in buildings, hardscape, and landscape construction that
can be a source of pollutants in stormwater, such as, copper and zinc roofs, roof gutters, downspouts,
and siding, galvanized materials (for example, fences, fence posts, guardrails, signposts), and treated
lumber.
• Use integrated pest management practices to control pests.
• Minimize the use of fertilizers onsite, and implement practices to reduce nutrient runoff (for example,
slow-release fertilizers, optimized application timing for plant uptake).
• Where appropriate, implement systems of practices in a treatment train to provide multiple pollutant
removal processes (for example, runoff reduction through evapotranspiration and infiltration,
sedimentation, filtration, adsorption, biological degradation, or uptake) to reduce the concentrations of
pollutants in precipitation runoff and to provide redundancy in the system.
• Use soil- and vegetation-based controls based on their capacity to reduce precipitation runoff and
pollutant loadings through evapotranspiration and phytoremediation.
DIVISION 32 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 211
Documentation
Project teams must provide the S+R Coordinator with the following onsite stormwater management
documentation:
• Prepare a site plan and a detailed description of all stormwater management strategies in the project
and their function and performance features in infiltration, evapotranspiration, reuse, or treatment.
• Report detailed treatment plans including volumetric capacity and removal efficiency according to
FDEP design criteria.
• SWPPP for all construction activities; refer to Section 01 57 23, Temporary Stormwater Pollution
Control, for SWPPP information and requirements.
32 12 00 Flexible Paving
See Division 34, Transportation, for standard road sections.
The hot mix asphalt used for shared-use paths must be composed of 100% RAP. Asphalt mixes for roads
and parking lots should use RAP to the maximum extent allowed by UFGS Division 32 specifications.
Porous asphalt paving must not be used within roadways or UFC-required parking areas on the
Installation. Parking lots provided beyond the minimum parking requirements per the UFC (that is,
overflow parking) must use a form of permeable paving systems.
In addition to UFC standards, roadway, shared-use path, sidewalk, driveway, and parking lot pavement
must be designed in accordance with Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) Design Manuals,
FDOT Pavement Type Selection Manual, and FDOT Flexible Pavement Design Manual. Use FDOT
District 6 criteria for pavement design in adverse conditions including saturated soils.
All vehicular roadway surfaces must use Long Life Pavement Design in accordance with the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Design of Pavement
Structures to protect the facility from storm damage and ensure longer pavement life-cycle.
32 13 00 Rigid Paving
RCA from the site will be used for road base to the extent possible. Coordinate with Section 02 41 00,
Demolition and Deconstruction. Use FDOT District 6 criteria for pavement design in adverse conditions
including saturated soils.
Pervious concrete paving must not be used within roadways or UFC-required parking areas on the
Installation. Pervious pavement is allowed to be used for overflow or surge parking areas.
In addition to UFC standards, roadways, shared-use paths, sidewalks, driveways, and parking lot
pavement must be designed in accordance with FDOT Design Manuals, FDOT Pavement Type Selection
Manual, FDOT Rigid Pavement Design Manual, and FDOT Flexible Pavement Design Manual.
All vehicular roadway surfaces must use Long Life Pavement Design in accordance with the AASHTO
Guide for the Design of Pavement Structures to protect the facility from storm damage and ensure longer
pavement life-cycle.
See Division 34, Transportation, for standard road sections.
32 14 00 Unit Paving
Unit pavers must be interlocking concrete pavers that meet ASTM C936. The pavers must be set on a
sand or concrete base and the color must complement the building color materials.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 32
212 04 November 2019
Pavers must be used at entries or plaza areas in front of Group 1 structures, public gathering areas such
as memorials, or in the Installation center. Paved plazas must have restrained edges that use adjacent
existing pavement, flush concrete curb, or metal edge restraint. The paving design pattern should include
a paver band, such as a solider or a sailor course. Pavers must have clean, tight cuts to fit against
elements within the paved plaza.
Pavers must be concrete pavers of the approved color, size, and finish. The color range must
complement architecture materials.
32 14 13.19 Permeable Paving Systems
Use permeable paving to reduce stormwater runoff in areas of parking that are overflow or areas that are
not often used but needed for certain events. Permeable surfaces include permeable concrete pavers,
PVC cells filled with stabilized crushed stone, or even crushed shell.
32 18 00 Athletic and Recreational Surfacing
All athletic fields must be synthetic turf for all playing surfaces. The fields must have fencing to secure
them for safety. Provide fixed stadium seating for baseball/softball fields with permanent shade features.
Fabric shade structures are not allowed over seating or dugouts. Metal bleachers on a flat concrete pad
are not allowed. Provide benches for teams on football fields and bleachers for spectators on the
football/soccer fields. Running tracks must use a high level, poured rubber surface that will last at least
20 years. Provide hose bibs at each facility for maintenance. Provide potable water at all fields for use by
players and coaches. All benches and shelters must be able to withstand high winds and flood conditions
of salt water. Provide restroom and concession buildings as required by the Government.
Synthetic grass must be Luxury 1st Cut synthetic turf from XGrass, 205 Boring Drive, Dalton, GA 30721:
Phone (877) 881-8477 or approved equal. Turf must have heat block and must be International Play
Equipment Manufacturers Association certified.
32 30 00 SITE IMPROVEMENTS
Coordinate site improvements with Section 10 70 00, Exterior Specialties.
32 31 00 Fences and Gates
Fencing
Fencing must be no-climb security fence that adheres to ATFP
requirements.
• Ameristar Fence, 3717 Mercy Star Court, Orlando, Florida 32808,
region4fax@ameristarfence.com, 888.333.3422
• Model: Wire Works anti-climb and anti-cut mesh
• Welded wire fabric with perma-coat powder coating
• Color: Black
• Wire Panels: 3 inch by 0.5 inch by 10.5 gauge (anti-climb mesh)
• Impasse II Rails: 2 inch by 2 inch by 11 gauge
• I-Beam Posts: 3 inch by 2.75 inch by 12 gauge /
4 inch by 2.75 inch by 11 gauge
• Height: 8 feet
DIVISION 32 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 213
Bollards
The model of bollard should be selected by the level of security desired –
light, medium, or heavy. It should also be selected by whether it should be
removable or fixed. If removeable, specify if the bollard should have a locking
mechanism, and if so, what kind. The size should be a minimum of 5 inches
in diameter. Use Type 316 stainless steel for use in a marine environment.
Lighting is optional; if the lighted option is chosen, select the heavy crashrated
model.
• Calpipe Security Bollards, 19440 S. Dominguez Hills Dr., Rancho
Dominguez, CA, 90220. (877) 283-8518. www.calpipebollards.com
Screen Walls and Dumpster Enclosures
Screen walls must be designed in accordance with architectural
image and character and will be coordinated with the overall
intent of the entry gate system.
• Custom Masonry Block Wall and Gates
• Color: CMU block to match building CMU color and size
• Finish: Split-face CMU, powder-coated metal
• Gates: Metal to match building metal type and finish
32 33 00 Site Furnishings
Picnic Grills
Grills for picnic areas must be Model ECG1941 Covered Charcoal Grill as
manufactured by Kay Park Recreation https://kaypark.com.
Grill must be:
• 14-gauge heavy-duty steel construction finished with high heat, nontoxic,
black enamel
• Covered hood to reduces floating cinders for fire safety
• 500 square inches of cooking surface
• 3 1/2-inch diameter in-ground pedestal
• Side utility shelf
32 33 13 Site Bicycle Racks
Bike racks must be galvanized ribbon steel pipe rack.
Model: The Ribbon Bike Rack, RB-07, as manufactured by
Brandir Inc. www.brandir.com.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 32
214 04 November 2019
32 33 23 Litter Receptacles
Trash Receptacles
• Trash receptacles will be Model SLDIS-136 Dispatch Litter and Recycling
Receptacle, 36 gallon with recycling openings. Receptacles must be
constructed of 90% recyclable content and made of rust-proof cast
aluminum, and be black in color.
• Manufacturer: Forms and Surfaces Pennsylvania, 30 Pine Street,
Pittsburgh, PA 15223, (800) 451-0410, www.Forms-Surfaces.com
Ash Receptacles
• Ash receptacles will be Model Pole Mount MDS/LGS Ash Receptacle.
Receptacle must be constructed of 73% recyclable content and made of rust
proof extruded aluminum.
• Manufacturer: Forms and Surfaces Pennsylvania, 30 Pine Street,
Pittsburgh, PA 15223, (800) 451-0410, www.Forms-Surfaces.com
32 33 33 Site Manufactured Planters
Pots should be used sparingly because they need
special irrigation and their plants require special care.
• Model: Kornegay Dune Series DS29 or DS40
• Color: White to match architectural
• Pots will be precast concrete as manufactured by
Kornegay Design, (877) 252-6323 or
(602) 252-6323. info@kornegaydesign.com.
32 33 43 Site Seating and Tables
32 33 43.13 Site Seating
Benches for general areas must be precast concrete benches
capable of withstanding movement from hurricane-force winds and
withstanding a marine environment. Benches must be Model Wood
Line WL--7 as manufactured by Streetscapes, Inc., 1400 Sixteenth
St., Suite 400, Denver, CO, 80202. info@Streetscapes.Biz.
Benches for the town center area must be Woodline WL-13 as
manufactured by Streetscapes, Inc.
DIVISION 32 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 215
32 33 43.53 Site Tables
Concrete is best because of its light color. Wood should be tropical
wood capable of withstanding long-term water immersion.
• Strata table and bench
• Landscape Forms, Inc., 7800 E. Michigan Ave., Kalamazoo, MI,
49048. (800) 430-6209. specify@landscapeforms.com.
Drinking Fountain
• Fountains will be manufactured by Murdock, 15125 Proctor Ave.,
City of Industry, CA, 91746
• Model: GYQ84-FRU3, all stainless steel
Play Equipment
Playgrounds must have
equipment that meets current
ADA access criteria. It must be
grouped together with elements
for appropriate age groups:
toddlers 6 to 23 months;
preschool, 2 to 5 years; and
grade school, 5 to 12 years.
Equipment must have elements
that are ADA accessible in
meaningful way, not just access
platforms. All playground
equipment must be located under
shade structures. All surfacing
under equipment must have
appropriate fall zones and depth of material must meet code for the height of the adjacent equipment.
The surfacing must be a high-quality poured rubber made from recycled rubber products. Surfacing must
be surrounded by a flat poured concrete curb edge. Include water fountains at each playground. Benches
must be provided for parents and teachers. Provide trash receptacles at each playground.
32 70 00 WETLANDS
Wetlands Buffers
The project team must complete the following documentation with respect to ensuring water quality
buffers to wetlands and surface waters:
• Identify wetlands and surface water on or near the site, or with the potential to be impacted by the
project
• Identify the appropriate type and width of buffer zones for wetlands and surface waters
• Provide vegetated buffers between impervious surfaces and wetlands and surface waters. Provide a
minimum 30-foot wide (100-foot preferred) vegetated buffer between buildings or pavement and
wetlands or surface waters. Sheet flow through 100 feet of vegetated buffer is considered to provide
water quality benefits by slowing surface runoff, and trapping sediments, pesticides, and other
pollutants.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 32
216 04 November 2019
Project teams must work with the S+R Coordinator (as required in Division 01) to document the following:
• Map of wetlands and surface waters in and around the site
• Identification of the proposed buffer width, hydrologic soil group, slope, land use, and vegetation mix
Document the environmental functions provided by the buffers according to width: pesticide retention;
bank stabilization; sediment control; nutrient retention; litter and debris; and water temperature.
Reference the St. Andrew Bay Watershed Surface Water Improvement and Management Plan
(St. Andrew Bay Environmental Study Team, 1998) for additional description of riparian buffers for water
quality protection.
32 72 00 Wetlands Restoration
When restoring a wetland, river, streams, lakes, or ponds, follow the process below and provide
associated documentation to prove the effectives of the restoration.
• Use site plan and ecological assessment to identify and describe the geographic extent of the existing
degraded, damaged, or destroyed aquatic ecosystems and proposed areas of restoration.
− Include calculations and dimensions of the existing and proposed restored geographic extent of
the aquatic ecosystems to prove restoration has been achieved. Reference site conditions may
need to be used to determine existing calculations.
• Restore the geographic extent of the aquatic ecosystem within the project boundary for 100% of the
geographic extent.
• Develop a restoration plan based on the “Nine Attributes of Restored Ecosystems” (Society of
Ecological Restoration, 2002) (below).
− Description of the reference site conditions to show the restored aquatic ecosystem has the same
native plant communities, appropriate aquatic habitat, water quality improvements, and stable
bank or shoreline conditions.
− Narrative describing how the project meets the goals and objectives of the latest edition of the
Society of Ecological Restoration’s “Nine Attributes of Restored Ecosystems” (2002).
− Narrative describing the restoration strategies implemented for each aquatic ecosystem to be
restored.
− Restoration of river and stream channels (if any) must also be inclusive of their respective
floodplain and riparian zone. Restoration of lakes and ponds (if any) must also be inclusive of
their respective shorelines.
• Signature from a restoration ecologist or recognized expert verifying the restoration plan has been
designed to achieve the above-listed required goals and objectives.
Attributes of Restored Ecosystems (from the Society for Ecological Restoration’s International Primer
on Ecological Restoration, 2002)
1) The restored ecosystem contains a characteristic assemblage of the species that occur in the
reference ecosystem and that provide appropriate community structure.
2) The restored ecosystem consists of indigenous species to the greatest practicable extent.
3) All functional groups necessary for the continued development and/or stability of the restored
ecosystem are represented or, if not, the missing groups have the potential to colonize by natural
means.
4) The physical environment of the restored ecosystem is capable of sustaining reproducing populations
of the species necessary for its continued stability or development along the desired trajectory.
5) The restored ecosystem apparently functions normally for its ecological stage of development, and
signs of dysfunction are absent.
DIVISION 32 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 217
6) The restored ecosystem is suitably integrated into a larger ecological matrix or landscape, with which
it interacts through abiotic and biotic flows and exchanges.
7) Potential threats to the health and integrity of the restored ecosystem from the surrounding landscape
have been eliminated or reduced as much as possible.
8) The restored ecosystem is sufficiently resilient to endure the normal periodic stress events in the local
environment that serve to maintain the integrity of the ecosystem.
9) The restored ecosystem is self-sustaining to the same degree as its reference system and has the
potential to persist indefinitely under existing environmental conditions.
32 80 00 LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION
Potable water use for irrigation purposes is not allowed per UFC 1-200-02, High Performance and
Sustainable Building Requirements. Rainwater harvesting or other alternative means is acceptable in
some cases as a water source for landscape irrigation.
Where irrigation for a project is to be provided by rainwater collection, coordinate the design with the
building mechanical and plumbing system designs to allow the collection of HVAC condensate and
rainwater from roof drain systems. Coordinate with Section 22 14 53, Rainwater Harvesting. Areas to
receive rainwater harvesting irrigation would be landscaping inside the Maintained Zones.
In isolated areas of Tyndall AFB where maintaining the quality of domestic water requires periodic
flushing of watermains, the Installation may consider an irrigation system in lieu of automated flush
valves. The system must be sized to use the planned volume and frequency of flushing, and no more
domestic water than was planned for water quality maintenance must be used.
32 90 00 PLANTING
Landscape Design Concept
Coordinate with Section 32 70 00, Wetlands Buffers. Landscape plantings must be consistent with
Florida-friendly landscaping as defined by 2019 Florida Statute 373.185
(http://www.leg.state.fl.us/statutes/index.cfm?App_mode=Display_Statute&URL=0300-
0399/0373/Sections/0373.185.html).
The landscape design must be defined by four zones: Natural Perimeter Zone, Transition Zone,
Maintained Zone, and Flight Line Zone.
Natural Perimeter Zone: This zone encompasses all perimeter areas and large unused areas among
groups of buildings. The zone must have native grasses, shrubs, and trees in accordance with the native
planting list developed by the 325 CES Community Planner and Environmental Office.
Transition Zone: The Transition Zone must contain mostly native wire and Indian grasses. It will be
mowed only twice per year when recommended.
Maintained Zone: This zone is located around the immediate perimeter of a building or the center of a
main space, such as the town center. Areas in this zone will have turf grass that will be mowed on a
regular basis to keep a manicured look. The zone should be drought resistant and also contain native
trees for shade and ornamental grasses and native shrubs for color and variety. Ornamental grasses and
shrubs should be located in areas close to building entrances. Design should be simple in nature but bold
in color. All landscaping should be to maintain.
Flightline Zone: The Flight Line Zone is similar to the Maintained Zone except that tree use should be
limited and not be planted close to the runway. Trees should be placed further back toward the second
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 32
218 04 November 2019
row of structures. Trees should be limited to species that do not attract birds. See AFI 91-212, especially
Chapter 3 for vegetation requirements to minimize attractiveness to wildlife near the flightline.
Xeriscape Design Principles
Minimizing Water Requirements
The Installation will have limited irrigation except in the Maintained Zone, which might receive water
through a rainwater harvesting system. Use plant species that are native and drought-tolerant. Temporary
irrigation may be used to establish plantings once they are first planted but not after one growing season.
Plant Material Selection
Plant selection must be as specified herein. Contractor/designer has the ability to modify the planting
pallet as long as it is approved by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service representative on the Installation. It
must be native and found in the local environment having shown resiliency to drought and establishment
in native soils.
Water Budgeting (Hydrozones)
Streetscape Landscaping
Street landscaping must be similar to the zone in which it is planted, most likely in the Transition Zone.
Bioswales should use planting recommended by Florida Fish and Wildlife that is capable of living in
varied conditions of short-term flooding to drought. Major streets should be lined with native trees to
provide shade and direct traffic. Trees must be planted on the land side of sidewalks and not between
sidewalks and curbs.
Parking Lot Landscaping
Parking lots should have native species of trees, shrubs, and grasses arranged in large groups to form a
designed look instead of a native, organic look. For islands with drainage, plants should be able to
withstand the same conditions specified for bioswales. Use trees for shade where appropriate. Do not
plant trees in small island spaces; plant them in the outside perimeter of the parking lot or in islands that
are no less than 10 feet wide.
Screen/Accent Landscaping
Plantings for screening must be native and evergreen of medium height.
Drip Irrigation Zones (Special Irrigation)
Drip irrigation will be used in shrub planting areas adjacent to building entrances where special planting
occurs. The water should not be potable and should come from rainwater harvesting.
Temporary Irrigation
Temporary irrigation will be used by the contractor to establish all plantings for one growing season as
part of their contract. After one season, planting must be weaned off water over a 6 month period to allow
plants to acclimate to local conditions.
32 93 00 Plants
Native and adapted non-invasive plans help to maintain ecosystem service, increase biodiversity, provide
wildlife habitat, minimize the use of fertilizer and pesticides, and require minimum maintenance. Projects
must remove invasive species found onsite, conserve existing appropriate plants, and only use
appropriate plants for installation. Consider plants with less wildfire flammability.
DIVISION 32 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 219
• Conduct an assessment that shows existing vegetated area and distinguishes which plants are
existing native species.
• Conserve existing native and adapted non-invasive plants onsite. If removal of existing native and
adapted non-invasive plants occurs, install new appropriate plants to equal 100% of final site
vegetated area.
− New native plant calculations are measured by surface area of final vegetated area, using
estimated vegetated cover within 10 years of installation.
• Appropriate plant species are species suitable for site conditions, climate, and design intent. Both
native and non-native plants may qualify. The list below shows invasive species as designed by
Federal or qualifying regional lists:
− State or local lists (when listing occurs through a vetted, transparent process and has been
accepted by regional stakeholders)
− The U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database
− Invasive Plant Atlas of the United States website
− State and Federal Noxious Weed laws
• In accordance with DoD Memo Water Use for Landscape Architecture on Department of Defense
Installations/Sites, potable water use is prohibited for irrigating new landscaping, other than for plant
establishment All plant materials must require no permanent irrigation after establishment period,
unless greywater or harvested rainwater is used for irrigation.
32 94 00 Planting Accessories
Tree Grates
Grates should be used sparingly. Trees will do better if planted
in grass or other soft areas instead of paved areas. The grate
must be aluminum and also must have a powder coat finish to
resist rusting.
• Urban Accessories, (877) 487-0488
sales@urbanaccessories.com
• Model: Cascade
• Powder-coated aluminum
DIVISION 33 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 221
DIVISION 33 UTILITIES
Division 33 includes requirements for water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electrical and
communications distribution and collection systems.
The utility systems must support Tyndall AFB as an Installation of the Future. Designs must incorporate
resilience, sustainability, and smart technologies focusing on areas of energy and water efficiency,
appropriate LCCA, mission resiliency, mission adaptability, health and safety, maintainability, metering,
and monitoring and commissioning.
During a service interruption from the public electrical or water utility the efficiency of all Installation
systems is a resiliency imperative to maximize the performance of limited onsite supply, generation and
storage, as stated in Division 01 Performance Requirements and Sustainable and Resilient Design
Requirements and further explained in Performance Standards for Resiliency, Sustainability, and SMART
Systems at Tyndall AFB. Documentation of accomplishing energy and water efficiency in design,
construction, and commissioning must be provided in accordance with Section 01 33 29, Sustainability
and Resiliency Reporting, and Section 01 91 00, Commissioning.
The UOC is a key component of the Installation of the Future and requirements are defined within this
division.
33 00 00 UTILITIES
33 01 00 Operation and Maintenance of Utilities
Improve mobility and safety for routine utility maintenance and emergency activities on the project.
• Provide adequate, dedicated space within the project for maintenance vehicles to park, turn,
maneuver, and perform routine utility maintenance activities without stopping traffic.
• Provide adequate, dedicated space within the project for emergency vehicle services and distressed
vehicles in an emergency to park, turn, maneuver, and perform temporary emergency activities safely
OR provide new access to emergency services, such as call boxes.
• Provide appropriate signage designating maintenance and emergency access, if required.
• Prepare a site map indicating the location(s) for maintenance and emergency access.
• Provide adequate access for utility maintenance crews to do their work with unrestricted clear space
on all sides. Clear space for performing maintenance tasks must allow each worker to achieve their
full range of motion safely.
• Provide adequate access to emergency services and a clear space between dedicated areas and
moving traffic.
• Demonstrate minimum compliance with International Fire Code regulations applicable as of the date
of project contract.
33 01 12 Inspection and Testing of Water Utilities
Modeling of the water system age and the predicted chlorine residual levels based on an updated and
maintained hydraulic model of the Installation-wide water distribution system must be completed when
system modifications are made or updated information about the water supply is available from Bay
County. The model must be used to predict areas that may experience low residual chlorine levels (an
indicator of possible low water quality). Testing stations must be installed to monitor chlorine residual
levels in these areas and report results via the SCADA system to the UOC.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 33
222 04 November 2019
33 05 27 Corrugated Metal Utility Pipe
Corrugated metal utility pipe must be used only in temporary installations (for example, erosion control or
temporary construction roadway drainage).
33 05 97 Identification and Signage for Utilities
All utility signage must be approved by Installation Security prior to installation.
33 05 97.13 Signage for Utilities
Unless overruled by security requirements, provide signs indicating the use, Owner or responsible
organization, structure or building number, and code-required safety messages must be installed at all
buildings, manholes, and equipment enclosures that are part of the utility systems.
33 05 97.16 Markers for Utility Identification
Markers and tracer wire must be installed for all underground utilities installed by trenchless techniques.
33 05 97.23 Underground Utility Warning Tape
Warning tape must be provided for all new underground utility installations installed by open cut methods.
33 09 10 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) for Utility
Operations Centers (UOCs)
Coordinate with Division 25, Integrated Automation. The SCADA system must monitor and control the
reconfigured Installation electrical distribution system from the utility inter-tie points for the Installationlooped
configuration using protection relays and associated devices. The system must be configured as a
self-healing topology to the extent possible with engineering access to the protection and control systems
to maximize uptime, increase safety, reliability, efficiency, and capacity for Installation improvements.
The SCADA system must be operated from the UOC, which will be located in a new building near the
Base Emergency Operations Center (EOC) facility. The UOC must be watched for normal operations
24/7. When an Installation emergency is declared, additional staff will report to the Installation EOC and
interface with the emergency management team at the remote UOC workstation.
The UOC should not be confused with a National Operations Center, Regional Operations Center, or the
overall Installation EOC.
The following design criteria apply to the utilities SCADA system and its associated UOC control room:
• Determine the most advantageous alignments using the pad-mounted switchgear switch and
protected ways with the local load manual switches. Provide a system topology using a redundant
ring for overall network communications, multiple sub-rings, and radial links (point-to-point) as
required for efficient and effective system communications.
• Provide communications processors, data concentrators, remote terminal units, remote input/output
(I/O) units, controllers, global positioning system time clock, secure gateways, and firewalls.
Demilitarized zones, event messaging, and associated software packages for the operations
monitoring, control, and inter-equipment signal processing must maintain the functional and
operational integrity of the system.
• Interface with the electrical distribution system (including the utility connection point), Installation
water utilities (water, waste water, sewer systems), SMART street light system, and the EMCS that
monitors various facilities throughout the Installation for monitoring and control functionality.
DIVISION 33 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 223
• Interface with the AMI for monitoring and control functions via the EMCS data communications link or
direct connection to meters as applicable.
• Provide continuous monitoring of the system and perform remedial actions in the event of an
electrical fault or other system disturbance through communications with the protective relays and
other monitoring devices. Protective relaying functions include bus, feeder, inter-tie, transformer,
switchgear, generator, and arc-flash protection.
• Provide primary system communications via IEC-61850 with GOOSE messaging; system must also
be able to communicate with multiple protocols, including Distributed Network Protocol 3.0, Modbus,
and Multimedia Messaging Service Client as needed.
• Provide components and redundant ethernet communications among the SCADA servers, SCADA
terminals, Engineering Laptop (acts as the Engineering Workstation), and any vendor object linking
and embedding for process control I/O servers to allow monitoring and control operations.
• Provide a minimum of two Operator Work Stations in the UOC control room with the requisite number
of bookcases, drawings files, large screen wall monitors, phones, radios, printers, and other
associated equipment for a fully functional system.
• The UOC must be sized to accommodate multiple operator workstations and large screen monitors to
support normal day-to-day operations as well as emergency conditions. The UOC must have meet
Human Factors Design principles such as lighting control system with dimmers and sound proofing.
The system must be powered from redundant uninterruptable power supply-backed power sources.
The UOC must be a secure entry facility requiring card-reader badging connected to the Installation’s
access control system.
• Provide software for the SCADA system, including all server/controller, network, and workstation
software components to implement the visualization, maintenance, configuration, virtualization,
control, historical trending, historical and event logging, and other features as described through this
document and on the drawings.
• Provide hardware and software components for the SCADA system so the server and networking
functionality is redundant and the failure of any one physical server or switch or any one virtualized
server does not impact the performance or availability of the SCADA functions described throughout
this document.
• The SCADA system network components, such as ethernet switches, servers, and cable distribution
boxes, must be located outside of the UOC control room as part of the Telecom Room.
• Provide system configuration, including database generation, graphic generation, logic and report
generation, loop configuration and supporting documentation.
• Provide a system that is easily expandable to include future systems growth for additional I/O,
controllers, servers, workstations, third-party interfaces, and wireless devices. Initial installation must
have 20% built-in spare capacity and space for an additional 20% expansion.
• Implement cyber security defense-in-depth strategies to prevent access to system data, control, and
monitoring functions by unauthorized personnel, including but not limited to:
− User access limits per assigned roles; include five levels
− Secure virtual private network with Internet Protocol Security
− Firewall, deny by default
− Media access control addressing; ethernet switch port control
− Anti-virus/malware protection software
− Virtual local area network for traffic segregation
− Personnel authentication (strong passwords)
− Multifactor authentication
• The UOC SCADA system is classified as a Security level SL-2 to a full risk assessment and
functional requirements determination as described in IEC 62443 standards.
• The UOC and associated field equipment/enclosures are Category Risk V and are required to survive
and function a Category 5 hurricane and 203-mph winds.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 33
224 04 November 2019
• The SCADA system must include a Computerized Maintenance Management System with the
following capabilities:
− Work order generation, prioritization, and tracking by equipment/component
− Historical tracking of all work orders generated that become sortable by categories such as
equipment, date, and person responding
− Tracking of scheduled and unscheduled maintenance activities
− Storing of maintenance procedures as well as all warranty information by component
− Storing of all technical documentation or procedures by component
− Real-time reports of ongoing work activity
− Calendar- or run-time-based preventive maintenance work order generation
− Capital and labor cost tracking by component as well as shortest, median, and longest times to
close a work order by component
− Complete parts and materials inventory control with automated reorder capability
− Outside service call/dispatch capabilities
A conceptual functional block diagram for the UOC SCADA system is shown on Figure 33-1.
Figure 33-1. Utilities SCADA System Functional Block Diagram
Notes for the above diagram:
• Diagrams are a functional representation of Installation systems connected to the UOC SCADA system.
• Remote terminal units (RTUs) must be located in hardened structures for the data collection from each location and connect to
the SCADA system via the new fiber optic backbone.
• Bas EMCS is existing; a new, dedicated fiber optic data link must be installed to the UOC SCADA system.
• There is no connection to the outside internet. Cyber protection is provided at the Installation level.
DIVISION 33 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 225
A conceptual UOC Control Room minimal layout is shown on Figure 33-2.
Figure 33-2. Utilities SCADA System Control Room Layout Diagram
Lightning protection for this equipment must adhere to the recommendations and requirements of the
following standards:
• IEEE 142, Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
• IEEE 1410, Guide for Improving the Lightning Performance of Electric Power Overhead Distribution
Lines
• LPI 75, Standard for the Design – Installation – Inspection of Lightning Protection Systems (2017)
• LPI 177, Inspection Guide for Certified Systems
• NFPA 780, Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems
• UFC 3-575-01, Lightning and Static Electricity Protection Systems
Related Government References
The following documents are related to the SCADA system and UOC design; this is not an all-inclusive
list. These documents should be considered when developing the design of this system:
• TM 5-601, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) Systems for Command, Control,
Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) Facilities
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 33
226 04 November 2019
• UFC 1-200-01, General building Requirements
• UFC 3-101-01, Architecture
• UFC 3-450-01, Noise and Vibration Control
• UFC 3-501-01, Electrical Engineering
• UFC 3-530-01, Design: Interior and Exterior Lighting Controls
• UFC 3-540-01, Emergency Power
• UFC 3-550-01, Exterior Electrical Power Distribution
• UFC 4-010-06, Cybersecurity of Facility-Related Control Systems
• UFC 4-141-04, Emergency Operations Center Planning and Design
Industry Codes and Standards References
The following sections list the Governmental regulations, industry codes and standards, and industry
guidelines used in the development of these criteria. This list may not be all inclusive and the DBOM
entity is responsible to determine if and what additional regulations, codes, and standards that may apply;
and follow these in the completion of the detailed design for the project. In addition, authorities having
jurisdiction over the design, construction and operation of the facility must be identified and adhered too.
These codes and standards set forth the minimum requirements. These may be exceeded by the Bidder
if, in its judgment and with Owner’s acceptance, superior or more economical designs or materials are
available.
The latest edition of the document must apply, unless a specific publication date is noted. The most
severe requirements must prevail in the event of conflict between requirements, specifications, and
applicable and governing codes.
• 47 CFR 15, Radio Frequency Devices
• 47 CFR 18, Industrial, Scientific, and Medical Equipment
• ANSI C63.4, Methods of Measurement of Radio-Noise Emissions from Low-Voltage Electrical and
Electronic Equipment in the Range of 9 kHz to 40 GHz
• ANSI C63.12, Recommended Practice on Electromagnetic Compatibility Limits
• ANSI/HFES-100, Human Factors Engineering of Computer Workstations
• ANSI/ISA 18.2, Management of Alarm Systems for the Process industries
• IEC-60068, Environmental Testing
• IEC-60812, Analysis Techniques for System Reliability – Procedure for Failure Mode and Effects
Analysis (FMEA)
• IEC-62443, Industrial Network and System Security
• IEC-61000-4, Electromagnetic Compatibility
• IEC-61000-6, Electromagnetic Compatibility
• IEC-61131, Series: Programmable Controllers
• IEC-61850, Series: Communication Networks and Systems for Power Utility Automation
• IEC-62439, Industrial Communications Networks
• IEC-62443, Series: Industrial Network and System Security
• IEC-62351, Power Systems Management and Associated Information Exchange – Data and
Communications Security
DIVISION 33 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 227
• IEEE C37.90, Relays and Relay Systems Associated with Electric Power Apparatus
• IEEE 730, Software Quality Assurance Plans
• IEEE 802, Series, Local and Metropolitan Area Networks
• IEEE 829, Software and System Test Documentation
• IEEE 1012, Software Verification and Validation Plan
• IEEE 1016, Software Design Description
• IEEE 1588, A Precision Clock Synchronization Protocol for Networked Measurement and Control
Systems
• IEEE 1613, Environmental and Testing Requirements for Communications Networking Devices
Installed in Electric Power Substations
• IEEE 1686, Substation Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs) Cyber Security Capabilities
• IEEE 1815, Electric Power Systems Communications-Distributed Network Protocol (DNP3)
• ISA 18.1, Annunciator Sequences and Specifications
• ISO 9001, Quality Management Systems
• MIL-STD-1472F, Department of Defense Design Criteria, Human Engineering
• NFPA-70, National Electrical Code with state amendments
• NIST SP 800-82, Guide to Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Security
• UL 1449, Standard for Surge Protective Devices
• UL 1778, Standard for Uninterruptible Power Supply Equipment
33 10 00 WATER UTILITIES
The Tyndall AFB preliminary water system hydraulic model will be completed under U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE). The final model will be completed by the contractor responsible for the design and
construction of the water system components for the Tyndall Rebuild and Gates project. Upon completion
of the Tyndall AFB rebuild construction, the model will be updated and finalized based on as-built
conditions and final assigned facility uses and planned personnel totals. After submittal of the final water
system model the privatized utility provider must maintain and update the model based on field tests and
system modifications.
Water Efficiency Integrated Design
Water utility project teams must develop strategies to reduce overall water consumption through the use
of greywater, recycled water, and harvested stormwater to meet non-potable water needs. In times of
service interruption of the public potable water supply, water efficiency is a key resiliency imperative to
maximize the performance of a limited supply of potable water. Project teams are requested to propose
water efficiency strategies beyond the individual building level. See Division 01, Sustainable and Resilient
Design Requirements, for potable water efficiency Integrated Design requirements. Coordinate with
Division 22, Plumbing. Report specification, installation and commissioning of water efficient features in
the Sustainability and Resiliency eNotebook as defined in Section 01 33 29, Sustainability and Resiliency
Reporting.
Dedicated Fire Protection Mains
Underground distribution piping for fire protection must be constructed with ductile iron pipe, and be
painted red.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 33
228 04 November 2019
Electrically Actuated Valves
Valves for the active control of the Installation water system must be butterfly valves. Actuators must be
electrically driven and include a battery back up to provide for operation during a power outage. Control of
valve position must be provided from the Installation UOC, with the default valve position being open.
Associated electrical and mechanical equipment must meet the requirements of the Tyndall AFB DFE
(USAF, 2019a).
33 16 00 Water Utility Storage Tanks
Tanks for the storage and supply of water for domestic use must be elevated to provide pressure to the
water system in the event of a loss of electrical power. Elevated storage tanks must be constructed of
steel meeting all requirements of the Tyndall AFB wind speed memorandum (USAF, 2019b).
Domestic water storage and supply tanks must be designed to meet the provisions of Risk Category IV.
When a new tank is required to meet additional storage needs, an updated model of the water distribution
system must be created. The size, elevation, and connection design must be tested to verify that the
operation of the new tank can meet the resiliency goals for additional storage while maintaining
water quality.
All tanks must include level sensors that report to the SCADA system at the UOC.
33 19 00 Water Utility Metering Equipment
Water utility project teams must install real-time water monitoring equipment and software to improve
water quality and efficiency, reduce leakage, and/or conserve water. Working with the S+R Coordinator,
project teams must document the following:
• Location, purpose, and type of monitoring equipment installed
• Plan for using the data to improve operational water performance
• Plan for integrating the monitoring equipment and data management with the UOC SCADA system as
part of the AMI system
33 30 00 SANITARY SEWERAGE
33 32 00 Sanitary Sewerage Equipment
Where gravity collection systems are not possible due to topography or other existing site conditions,
sanitary sewer pumping stations must be installed. The system design must make use of gravity mains
to the greatest extent possible. Lift stations should be designed to serve multiple buildings
where possible.
All Lift stations must meet these minimum requirements:
• Dual pumps must be used to provide system redundancy and improved reliability.
• Parallel force mains must be installed with a minimum of 5-foot horizontal clearance between pipes.
Each main must connect directly to one of the dual pumps at the station, and piping and valves must
be provided to allow shifting of flow between the pumps and force mains.
• Additional wet well storage must be provided to account for a minimum of 3 hours of design flow
above the level of the emergency alarm, unless site constraints make this infeasible.
DIVISION 33 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 229
• Standby power generation can be provided by a dedicated generator, be designed in to a system for
a nearby facility, or be provided as a connection point for a portable generator.
• Protect the lift station’s mechanical and electrical systems against flood waters at the Tyndall AFB
DFE (USAF, 2019a). Protect the gravity sewer manholes from inflow and from overflow during flood
conditions.
33 40 00 STORMWATER CONVEYANCE
Coordinate with overall stormwater management requirements and unifying design clarifications located
at the front of Division 32, Exterior Improvements.
Conveyances should be designed according to the selected/approved design storm such that the
hydraulic gradeline is below the ground level in the piping system. Financial feasibility may inform
decisions regarding design criteria that exceeds minimum UFC requirements. Where feasible, open
channel conveyance is preferred over piped systems.
33 44 43 Manufactured Stormwater Treatment Devices
Where large areas of pavement are likely to generate substantial quantities of suspended solids in runoff
or where a greater-than-normal possibility of oils or other pollutants are present, a Manufactured
Treatment Device must be installed. This must function as a pretreatment of stormwater upstream of
entering landscaped or infiltration-based water quality systems or other detention/retention facilities. The
units selected must adhere to the following standards:
• Be certified for 80% total suspended solids removal by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection or the State of Washington Department of Ecology
• Provide storage for oil and other floatable contaminants
• Be of a general design that allows ease of maintenance under the existing contract for similar work on
the Installation
Devices not approved by the referenced organizations may be considered after review of design and
testing documentation showing compliance with the above standards and similar testing methods
required to earn the certifications.
Where hydrocarbons and not total suspended solids are the key pollutant, an oil/water separator with less
than 80% total suspended solids removal is acceptable.
33 46 23 Modular Buried Stormwater Storage Units
Where Installation development plans limit the space available for above-ground storage facilities for
stormwater management underground structured systems may be used. Structures may be cast in place
concrete vaults, manufactured modular units made of concrete or HDPE, or pipes. All systems must be
designed to manage the runoff from the appropriate design storm, support a H-20 loading at a minimum
(a higher loading standard may be required by the Installation dependent on the expected uses of the
associated facility). Water quality management must be provided by a pretreatment system or an open
bottom system which allows infiltration. Consider the implications of high groundwater table.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 33
230 04 November 2019
33 70 00 ELECTRICAL UTILITIES
The resiliency and sustainability of electric power will be enhanced by implementing high speed switching
and protective capabilities to the transmission and distribution systems. Such devices allow electric power
to follow alternative paths during emergency conditions.
33 71 00 Electrical Utility Transmission and Distribution
All electrical distribution must be installed underground. At a minimum, underground distribution must be
6-way PVC duct encased in concrete. All conductors must be copper. Medium-voltage conductors must
be MV105, 133%, ethylene propylene rubber insulation. At a minimum, provide one spare conduit.
Conduit must be at a minimum 6-inch PVC Schedule 40 for medium-voltage power conductors. Conduit
must be at a minimum 4-inch PVC Schedule 40 for low-voltage power conductors. Conduit must be at a
minimum 2-inch PVC Schedule 40 for communications/control conductors.
All potentially exposed electric utility transmission and distribution will be designed to withstand winds of
Risk Category IV (170 mph).
33 73 00 Utility Transformers
Transformer enclosures must be constructed of corrosion-resistant material, such as marine grade
aluminum or stainless steel. All utility transformers will be designed to withstand winds of Risk Category
IV (170 mph).
Transformers must be installed at an elevation no less than the Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a), or must
be specifically designed, constructed, and installed to prevent floodwaters from entering or accumulating
within components.
33 77 00 Medium-Voltage Utility Switchgear and Protection Devices
Switchgear enclosures must be constructed of corrosion-resistant material, such as marine-grade
aluminum or stainless steel. All medium-voltage switchgear and protective devices will be designed to
withstand winds of Risk Category IV (170 mph).
Metal-clad switchgear must be IEEE C37.20.7 Type 2 Arc-Resistant.
Switchgear must be installed at an elevation no less than the DFE, or must be specifically designed,
constructed, and installed to prevent floodwaters from entering or accumulating within components
(USAF, 2019a).
Pad-mounted medium-voltage switchgear must be dead front design. Each switchgear must have a
minimum of two switched ways and two protected ways. The switched ways must be equipped with motor
operators, batteries, current transformers, and fault indicators. The fault indicators must have a normally
open contact that toggles under fault indication for external monitoring. Each switchgear must be
equipped with a microprocessor-based protective relay. The relay must be capable of opening or closing
both the switched ways and protected ways. The relay must operate the protected ways under fault
conditions. The relay must be wired for switch status, protected way status, and fault indicator status. The
relay must be capable of SCADA communications using IEEE 61850 over fiber. Each switchgear must be
arranged in a loop configuration with switched ways connecting to other switches or the substation and
protected ways feeding buildings or other loads looped back to another switchgear protected way with a
normally open point in the center of that loop. Each normally open point will be approximately splitting the
loop load in half. If a fault develops between any two switches, the substation will operate, isolating that
loop. The two switches closest to the fault will open, the normally open point will close, refeeding the
system once the substation recloses that feeder. For a fault on the protected ways, the relays must open
the protected ways closest to the fault and close the normally open point refeeding the loads. The UOC
DIVISION 33 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 231
SCADA system must be capable of operating each switch or protected way for load shedding of noncritical
loads under utility failures.
33 80 00 COMMUNICATIONS UTILITIES
33 82 00 Communications Transmission and Distribution
See Section 27 05 28, Pathways for Communications Systems.
DIVISION 34 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 233
DIVISION 34 TRANSPORTATION
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 34 work include mission resilience, infrastructure resilience, Universal Design, and
SMART systems related to transportation systems.
The transportation system is designed to provide system protection and facilitate continuous operations.
This is achieved through minimal use of traffic signal systems. Instead, roundabouts must provide access
control at arterial intersections. Safety and access are improved through the use of sidewalks and shareduse
paths for people walking or riding bikes. Life-cycle impacts of the transportation system are reduced
for new construction through the use of long-life pavement design for vehicular roadways and the use of
recycled asphalt for the shared-use paths. Roadway lighting used must be controlled and controllable to
power down when not needed to save energy and power up in case of emergency.
34 70 00 TRANSPORTATION CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT
34 71 00 Roadway Construction
The hierarchy of streets must be based on the master road network plan. The network consists of the
three road types:
1) Heavy Haul Road
2) Arterial Street
3) Shared Use Path
The arterial street and heavy haul road must include travel lanes, shared-use path or sidewalk, and utility
corridor. The primary difference between an arterial street and a heavy haul road is the pavement
materials and depth. The heavy haul street must have pavement designed to withstand heavy truck traffic
of the type and frequency of heavy vehicles to be provided by the government. Technical information for
pavement design standards must be provided by the geotechnical report (see Division 32, Exterior
Improvements).
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS)
See Division 25, Integrated Automation.
Curb and Gutter, and Ribbon Curbs
Whenever possible, design roadways with at-grade ribbon curbs (in lieu of a curb and gutter and
subsurface stormwater system), which will allow stormwater runoff to flow into bioretention swales in the
buffer.
Street Lighting
See Section 26 50 00, Lighting.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities
In addition to UFC standards, design of pedestrian facilities, shared use paths, and bicycle facilities must
refer to FDOT Design Manuals 222 – Pedestrian Facilities, 223 – Bicycle Facilities, and 224 – Shared
Use Paths, as well as Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways or AASHTO
Guidelines for Bicycle Facilities, whichever is more stringent for design of paths including pavement
marking and signage.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 34
234 04 November 2019
Intersection Configuration
Intersection configuration must encourage passive systems such as roundabouts in lieu of signalized
intersections. Aggressively pursue passive systems to lower maintenance demands and reduce energy
use. Design traffic signal mast arms and related traffic control devices (such as traffic signal devices and
signs) for the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements (USAF, 2019b) and as provided in the Miami-Dade
NOA. In addition to UFC standards, refer to FDOT Design Manual for design of roundabouts (213 –
Modern Roundabouts)
Paving Materials
See Division 32, Exterior Improvements, for flexible pavement, rigid pavement, and pervious pavement.
Entry Control Facilities
Entry Control Facilities must be designed in accordance with the Air Force Civil Engineer Center’s
Facilities Dynamic Prototypes Design: Entry Control Facilities/Installation Access Control Points dated
01 March 2015. Roads at entry control facilities require curb and gutter instead of ribbon curb and
bioswales.
Road Cross Sections
The following modifications must be made to the IFS (USAF, 2018):
• Deviate: Cross-section illustrations for all streets must not be followed as shown in the Pre-Final
Tyndall AFB IFS (USAF, 2018); the cross-sections illustrations will be replaced by the design
guidelines in this appendix.
• Add: Example Heavy Haul Road Arterial Cross-Section:
− Two travel lanes (12 feet wide each) portland cement concrete pavement, no median, concrete
ribbon curb (2 feet wide) curb, safety buffer, parallel shared-use path (10 feet wide), and future
utility corridor (20 feet wide).
• Add: Example Standard Road Arterial Cross-Section
− Two Lane: travel lanes (12 feet wide each) long-life designed asphalt, no median, concrete ribbon
curb (2-feet), shared-use path (10 feet wide), safety buffer, and future utility corridor (20 feet
wide).
− Four Lane: travel lane (12 feet wide each) hardened asphalt, no median, concrete ribbon curb
(2 feet wide), shared-use path (10 feet wide), safety buffer, and future utility corridor (20 feet
wide).
DIVISION 35 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 235
DIVISION 35 WATERWAY AND MARINE
CONSTRUCTION
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements. Sustainability and resilience requirements and guidelines
specific to Division 35 work include mission resilience, infrastructure resilience, and SMART systems.
Infrastructure in and near waterways have a higher risk of environmental impact. Ensure project designs,
and construction activities include required protections and also best in class performance for sustainable
and resilient infrastructure.
35 00 00 WATERWAY AND MARINE CONSTRUCTION
35 05 05 Selective Demolition for Waterway and Marine Construction
References:
• ANS) A10.6, Safety Requirements for Demolition Operations
• OSHA U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 29, Part 1926, Occupational Safety and Health
Regulations for Construction
• CFR Title 40:
− Part 61, National Emission Standard for Hazardous Air Pollutants
− Part 82, Protection of Stratospheric Ozone
− Part 273, Standards for Universal Waste Management:
 Where demolition and removals are indicated, remove the item in its entirety, unless
otherwise noted.
 Dispose of all material legally offsite and off Owner property.
o Comply with Federal, state, and local hauling and disposal regulations.
o Burning at the site for the disposal of refuse and debris is not permitted.
o Material must be transported in a manner that prevents spillage on streets or
adjacent areas.
 Where possible, removed material must be recycled.
o Provide documentation of quantity, material, and location of recycled items.
 Salvage and deliver to the Owner materials, equipment, and other items as indicated.
Pack/crate and transport items in a manner to protect the items from damage while in storage
and during shipment. Provide proper identification of contents.
o Delivery of salvaged items must be to a storage site as directed by the Owner, anywhere
on the property.
 Remove, protect, and relocate materials, equipment, and other items as indicated or directed
by the Owner.
 Take appropriate means to protect existing items to remain in place, to be reused, or to
remain the property of the Owner. Any contractor-damaged item must be repaired or
replaced as directed by the Owner. Document the condition of all items to remain in place, to
be reused, or to remain the property of the Owner.
 Use of explosives is not permitted.
 Do not used demolition debris as backfill material.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 35
236 04 November 2019
 Fill all excavations and other hazardous openings to existing ground level.
− Protection:
 Provide appropriate turbidity barriers about all water work.
o Anchor the barriers to the bottom.
o Account for water level changes, wind, and wave/wake action in the design of the barrier.
 Provide appropriate erosion/sediment control measures to prevent sediment movement into
adjacent waterways, wetlands, or drainage systems.
 Prevent spread of dust and debris and avoid the creation of nuisance or hazard in the
surrounding area.
 Provide barricades, shoring, and other forms of protection to protect contractor’s and Owner’s
personnel.
− Submittals:
 Submit demolition and removal plan for approval prior to start of work.
 Include detailed description of methods and equipment to be used for each operation.
 Include contractor’s planned sequence of operations.
35 20 00 WATERWAY AND MARINE CONSTRUCTION AND
EQUIPMENT
35 24 00 Dredging
35 24 13 Dredging
Dredging must be performed the equipment appropriate to the material type, quantity, and means of
disposal, including:
• Suction dredging
• Bucket dredging
• Clamshell dredging
• Backhoe/dipper dredging
Dredge material must be disposed of offsite at the location indicated. If no location is shown, the
contractor must dispose of the material in a legal manner.
Dredge material that complies with earthwork or backfill specifications may be used for such on approval
of the Owner.
Provide turbidity barriers about the dredging site, including the dredging equipment and barges.
• Anchor the barriers to the bottom.
• Account for water level changes, wind, and wave/wake action in the design of the barrier.
35 30 00 COASTAL CONSTRUCTION
Project teams must work with the S+R coordinator (as required in Division 01) to address and document
the following coastal sustainability and resilience design requirements:
• Coordinate with 325 CES Environmental Office and the Tyndall AFB INRMP to align with coastal
restoration and resilience plan objectives and to identify the site-wide ecological context and potential
vulnerabilities.
DIVISION 35 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 237
• Avoid highly erodible or coastal erosion hazard areas.
• Minimize flood risk consistent with the Tyndall AFB DFE memorandum (USAF, 2019a) including sea
level rise through context appropriate strategies.
• Coastal construction elements must not restrict overland stormwater flow from developed areas to
the Bay.
• Elevate all mechanical and electrical systems and equipment storage areas above DFE (USAF,
2019a).
• Apply a waterproof coating to exterior walls and seal all wall penetrations, including windows, doors,
and locations where utilities enter the building.
• Mitigate flooding of utility systems, including electrical and telecommunications conduits, sanitary
sewer and stormwater infrastructure, to minimize infiltration during a storm surge event.
• Consider the need to install backflow prevention devices, duckbills, or tidal check valves in
stormwater infrastructure to prevent tidal and surge flooding of stormwater infrastructure. This should
be paired with a high onsite precipitation capture given the potential for backup or overflow during
high precipitation events.
• Increase the durability of structures: Strengthen foundations, floor slabs, and walls to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and buoyant forces.
• Use building and structural materials resistant to saltwater, flooding, heat, cold, wind, and UV light,
but environmentally safe.
• Free the areas below the lowest floor of elevated buildings of obstructions or ensure that any
enclosed areas constructed of non-supporting breakaway walls, open lattice-work, or screening will
not cause building collapse, displacement, or other damage to the building foundation if impacted by
or lost due to wave forcing in areas within or near the current limits of moderate wave action, which
includes FEMA A and V zones.
• Develop, where appropriate, landscape-scale storm-surge and wave damage risk reduction features,
including upland strategies that reduce the impacts of flooding and waves on vulnerable assets, such
as vegetated upland berms connected with high elevation points, floodwalls integrated into the
landscape, raising edge elevation, or other landscape features.
• Employ nature-based features as feasible to reduce wave damage from smaller, more frequent
storms, including wetland, mangrove, coastal shrubland, and edge forest.
• Use shoreline edge materials for stabilization that have a chemical composition, alkalinity, toxicity,
pH, and other features that support the native biological community and attachment of characteristic
marine organisms.
• Design and enhance structural features to provide more heterogeneity and habitat-supporting
complexity than conventional stabilization methods by using rough, textured, surfaces or varied sizes
of rock that create interstitial spaces of varied size and shape, using a material with a pH that fosters
attachment or provides refugia for native aquatic organisms.
• Use water-retaining ecological features to increase diversity of habitat and maintain some intertidal
zonation, such as precast tide pools.
• Incorporate nature-based features that provide multiple benefits, such as tiered, reinforced edges with
native plantings, oysters, mussels, and salt marsh.
• Incorporate temporary stabilization strategies for wave attenuation and erosion reduction until
vegetation is established.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 35
238 04 November 2019
35 31 00 Shoreline Protection
All design activities related to Shoreline Protection must be conducted in collaboration with 325 CES
Environmental Office within the guidelines of the Tyndall AFB INRMP. Project teams must assess and
develop opportunities for integrating Natural and Nature-Based Features (NNBF) in all Shoreline
Protection designs. Examples of NNBF include beaches and dunes; vegetated environments such as
maritime forests, salt marshes, freshwater wetlands and fluvial flood plains, and seagrass beds; coral and
oyster reefs; and barrier islands, among others. These features may occur naturally in landscapes or be
engineered, constructed, and/or restored to mimic natural conditions. For more information see USACE’s
Engineering With Nature website: https://ewn.el.erdc.dren.mil/nnbf.html.
35 50 00 MARINE CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT
35 51 00 Floating Construction
35 51 13 Floating Piers
References:
• UFC 4-152-07, Design: Small Craft Berthing Facilities
• UFC 3-600-01, Fire Protection Engineering for Facilities
• ASCE Manual of Practice No. 50, Planning and Design Guidelines for Small Craft Harbors (MOP 50)
• NFPA 303, Fire Protection Standard for Marinas and Boatyards
− Floating Dock: Dock floats should be comprised of an expanded polystyrene foam core
encapsulated in a protective shell
 Form core should resist water absorptions, limited to not more than 3% as determined by
ASTM C272, Method C
 The shell should be comprised of stainless-steel, marine-grade aluminum, or concrete. The
use of timber shell will not be permitted
 The shell should resist abrasion and penetration
 A continuous utility trench should be incorporated into the float
 Dock floats should be warrantied from sinking, becoming waterlogged, cracking, peeling,
staining, and fading for no less than 10 years
− Freeboard: Dock floats should provide no less than 16 inches and no more than 24 inches of
freeboard under dead load only; provide no less than 10 inches of freeboard with full dead and
live load
− Stability: The dock should have no less than 2 inches of freeboard to the top of the buoyancy
pontoon under full dead and live loads
 The dock floats should be able to withstand overturning forces from berthing mooring, wind,
waves, and currents and return to normal orientation on removal of the unbalancing forces
− Dead loads on floats should consist of self-weight and weight of permanent attachment, such as
cleats, fenders, dock boxes, utility boxes, and utilities
− The vertical live load on dock floats should be no less than 100 pounds per square foot uniform
and 400 pounds concentrated on any point at least 1 foot from the dock edge; both uniform and
concentrated load should not be applied concurrently
DIVISION 35 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 239
− Environmental loads: The system should account for the following in the design:
 Wind on berth vessels, floats, and supporting structure
 Currents on berth vessels, floats, and supporting structure due to tidal and river flows
 Waves due to locally generated wind waves and boat waves and swell from offshore storms
 Floating debris due to impact or accumulation on the structure
 Floods and surges that produce extreme water levels and currents
− Anchorage: Dock floats should be connected to the cantilever guide/anchor piles with stainlesssteel
straps and ultra-high molecular weight polystyrene rollers or rub strips; the roller/pads
should be installed so they may be replaced when worn.
 Provide no less than one full set of spare rollers/pad for each connection
− Moorings and fenders:
 Provide cast steel cleats at no more than 10 feet on center along both sides of the dock
floats; attach cleats to the dock with no less than two bolts; the bolt head should be recessed
to prevent line chafing; the cleat should be sized for the design vessel as indicated
 Provide a continuous horizonal composite or plastic rub rail with a vinyl fender along the full
length of each berth
 Provide mooring piles between slips at all double slips with one mooring cast steel cleat
positioned on opposite sides of each pile; locate the cleat above the water level to
accommodate the variation in water levels, mean lower low water (MLLW) to mean higher
high water (MHHW), but no more than 5 feet above MLLW to allow for access from the
vessel
− Gangway: Provide a variable slope transition gangway from the shore to the floating dock
 The gangway should be removable in the event of predicted storm events
 The slope of the gangway should be no steeper than 20 horizontal to 1 vertical (20:1) for
water levels between MLLW and MHHW
− Mooring fittings and fenders/bumpers:
 Provide cast steel cleats at no more than 10 feet on center along both sides of the piers;
attach cleats to the dock with no less than two bolts; the bolt head should be recessed to
prevent line chafing; the cleat should be sized for the design vessel as indicated.
 Provide a continuous horizonal composite or plastic rub rail with a vinyl fender/bumper along
the full length of each berth
− Materials:
 All materials should be fire-resistant
 All fasteners and hardware should be stainless steel, Type 316
 All material should be suitable for saltwater marine environment and should be resistant to
fuels and oil
 The deck surface should consist of concrete or composite (wood-plastic) material and should
resist sunlight (UV), wetting/drying, freezing/thawing, and fuel and oils; the surface should be
textured for skid resistance and. The surface must resist abrasion, denting from dropped
objects, and cracking
o The deck surface should slope to the dock edges for drainage at a rate of no less than
1/8 inch and no more than 1/4 inch per foot
 The dock float sections should be connected using stainless-steel hardware; the connection
system should account for fluctuation in water depth, wind, and wave exposure.
o Support piles should be composed of either precast, prestressed concrete piles no less
than 12 inches square or composite piles no less than 12 inches in diameter
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 35
240 04 November 2019
 Piles should be embedded below the design water depth to resist all uplift and lateral loads
resulting from the loads; a Factor of Safety of no less than 1.2 must be provided for the
extreme wind, wave, and surge forces and no less than 1.5 for operating loads
o Provide a cone-shaped pile cap with bird deterrent spikes an all exposed pile tops; the
cap should be composed of galvanized steel, stainless steel, fiberglass, or composite
material
 Pile tops not extending above the deck should be coated with a bituminous mastic
with a stainless-steel sheet fastened to the top of the pile
 Dock floats should be warrantied from sinking, becoming waterlogged, cracking,
peeling, staining, and fading for no less than 10 years
 Services:
o Provide one lockable dock box as agreed upon with the Government for each slip; locate
the dock box near the head of the slip in a location that does not impede pedestrian
movements; dock boxes must be composed of fiberglass
o Provide potable water at each slip; the hose bib may be incorporated into a utility
pedestal
o Provide electric power of no less than 125VAC/20-Amp outlet and one 125VAC/30-Amp
twist-lock outlet per berth
o Provide a utility pedestal for each berth; the pedestal should contain the electrical and
water services along with a photocell-controlled LED light; it should be for marine use and
should consist of a resin housing with a two-part polyurethane coating that is UV-resistant
o Fuel supply, communication, and sewage and oily wastewater collection are not required,
unless otherwise indicated
35 52 00 Offshore Construction
35 52 13 Fixed Offshore Construction/Fixed Piers
• Reference:
− UFC 4-152-07, Design: Small Craft Berthing Facilities
− UFC 3-600-01, Fire Protection Engineering for Facilities
− ASCE Manual of Practice No. 50, Planning and Design Guidelines for Small Craft Harbors
(MOP 50)
− NFPA 303, Fire Protection Standard for Marinas and Boatyards
• Fixed Dock: Dock structures should be comprised of materials appropriate for use in marine
environments.
• Freeboard: The top of the dock deck should be established at the elevation indicated.
• Dead loads on the dock should consist of self-weight and weight of permanent attachment, such as
cleats, fenders, dock boxes, utility boxes, and utilities.
• The vertical live load on the dock should be no less than 100 pounds per square feet uniform and
400 pounds concentrated on any point at least 1 foot from the dock edge; both the uniform and
concentrated load should not be applied concurrently.
• Mooring Fittings and Fenders/Bumpers:
− Provide cast steel cleats at no more than 10 feet on center along both sides of the finger pier;
attach cleats to the dock with no less than two bolts; the bolt head should be recessed to prevent
line chafing and the cleat should be sized for the design vessel as indicated.
DIVISION 35 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 241
− Provide a continuous horizonal composite or plastic rub rail with a vinyl fender/bumper along the
full length of each berth.
− Provide a vertical rub strake spaced at no more than 10 feet on the center along both sides of
the berth.
 Extend the strake below the deck to no less than an elevation +1.00.
 Extend the strake above the deck to no less than 2 feet.
 Provide a vinyl fender/bumper strip the full length of the rub strake.
 Attach the strakes to the structural frame of the dock.
• Environmental Loads: The system must account for the following in the design:
− Wind on berth vessels, floats, and supporting structure.
− Currents on berth vessels, floats, and supporting structure due to tidal and river flows.
− Waves due to locally generated wind waves and boat waves and swell from offshore storms.
− Floating debris due to impacts or accumulations on the structure.
− Floods and surges that produce extreme water levels and currents.
• Materials:
− All materials should be fire-resistant.
− All fasteners and hardware should be stainless steel, Type 316.
− All material should be suitable for saltwater marine environment and should be resistant to fuels
and oil.
− The deck surface should consist of concrete or composite (wood-plastic) material and should
resist sunlight (UV), wetting/drying, freezing/thawing, and fuel and oils; the surface should be
textured for skid resistance and should resist abrasion, denting from dropped objects, and
cracking.
 The deck surface should slope to the dock edges for drainage at a rate of no less than
1/8 inch and no more than 1/4 inch per foot.
− Dock float sections should be connected using stainless-steel hardware; the connection system
should account for fluctuation in water depth, wind, and wave exposure.
 Guide piles should be composed of either precast, prestressed concrete piles no less than
12 inches square or composite piles no less than 12 inches in diameter.
o Piles should be embedded below the design water depth to resist all uplift and lateral
loads resulting from the loads; a Factor of Safety of no less than 1.2 should be provided
for the extreme wind, wave, and surge forces and no less than 1.5 for operating loads.
o Provide a cone-shaped pile cap with bird deterrent spikes; it should be comprised of
galvanized steel, stainless steel, fiberglass, or composite material.
• Services:
− Provide one lockable dock box of no less than 20-cubic feet capacity for each slip; locate the
dock box near the head of the slip in a location that does not impede pedestrian movements;
dock boxes must be comprised of fiberglass.
− Provide potable water at each slip; the hose bib may be incorporated into a utility pedestal.
− Provide electric power of no less than 125VAC/20 amp outlet and one 125VAC/30 amp twist-lock
outlet per berth.
− Provide a utility pedestal for each berth; the pedestal should contain the electrical and water
services along with a photocell-controlled LED light; the pedestal should be for marine use and
should consist of a resin housing with a two-part polyurethane coating that is UV-resistant.
− Fuel supply, communication, and sewage and oily wastewater collection are not required, unless
otherwise indicated.
DIVISION 44 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 243
DIVISION 44 POLLUTION AND WASTE CONTROL
EQUIPMENT
Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including common product,
process, and documentation requirements.
44 10 00 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
It is anticipated that future intelligent transportation systems or other transportation demand management
approaches will be implemented to optimize traffic operations and reduce traffic emissions.
Projects must encourage the use of clean, renewable energy vehicles to reduce traffic emissions by
anticipating future retrofit to incorporate related infrastructure, such as E-charge stations alternative fuel
vehicles and carpool vehicles.
44 41 32 Drum Containment Units
Every hazardous waste catch container for any process must be limited to 55 gallons total capacity.
DIVISION 48 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 245
DIVISION 48 ELECTRICAL POWER GENERATION
The electrical power generation systems must support Tyndall AFB as an Installation of the Future.
Designs must incorporate resilience, sustainability, and SMART systems focusing on areas of mission
resiliency, equipment resiliency, mission adaptability, safety, maintainability, metering, monitoring and
commissioning. Refer to Division 01 for overarching sustainability and resilience requirements, including
common product, process, and documentation requirements.
48 10 00 ELECTRICAL POWER GENERATION EQUIPMENT
48 14 00 Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Systems
The Solar PV Generation System must be ground-mounted and provided as a modular package that
includes solar panels, mounting infrastructure, inverters, monitoring and electrical interconnect(s). The
modular packages can be increased in quantity and capacity if needed.
The PV system must be configured to maximize availability, resiliency, reliability, efficiency, and capacity
for current and future Installation improvements.
UFC 3-301-01, Structural Engineering, and the Tyndall AFB wind speed requirements (USAF, 2019a) are
used in the structural design for DoD locations and implements the ASCE 7, Minimum Design Loads for
Buildings and Other Structures.
The PV system must be capable of withstanding external environmental conditions without mechanical or
electrical damage or degradation of operating characteristics. These conditions can include:
• Subtropical heat and rain, including Category 5 hurricanes
• Wind driven dust and debris
• Salt laden atmosphere
• High humidity (100%)
The following design criteria apply to the PV system:
• The minimum efficiency of the PV solar panels must be no less than 15%.
• The solar panels must have a degradation factor of no more than 0.25% per year over an expected
25-year service lifetime.
• The solar panels must have an anti-reflective coating installed by the manufacturer.
• The fixed tilt angle of the solar arrays must be between 15 and 20 degrees.
• The framework for the solar panels must be corrosion-resistant stainless steel or aluminum.
• The solar panel connection to racking must use multiple thru-bolt connection system for each panel.
Clip attachment systems to the racking purlins are not allowed.
• Solar arrays that consist of multiple solar panels and are installed on racking must be mounted on
concrete ballast pads at least 18 inches above ground in height.
• The bottom edge of the solar arrays must be no less than 30 inches above ground level, and above
the Tyndall AFB DFE (USAF, 2019a).
• The top edge of the solar arrays must be no more than 8 feet above ground level.
• The solar array spacing must be no less than 15 feet between rows.
• Bird diverters consisting of small diameter wire spikes must be installed on the top edge of the
solar arrays.
Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final DIVISION 48
246 04 November 2019
• The power inverters (DC to AC) must be capable of full operation in ambient temperature range of
35 to 115°F and high humidity.
• The inverters must be “string type” and sized to no more than 36 kW of DC power input capacity.
• The inverters must be self-contained in weathertight and secure enclosures mounted underneath the
solar arrays.
• The inverters must be capable to operate at full power output of the PV system under all
circumstances, including the network voltage deviations.
• The peak efficiency of the inverters must be no less than 96%.
• All DC cabling must be independently earthed and electrically isolated from the AC cabling.
• Lightning and surge protection systems must be included in the solar array and inverters.
• All exposed cables and connectors must be of solar grade robust and durable (for 25-year design life)
in harsh environmental conditions, including high temperatures, UV radiation, rain, humidity, dirt, and
attack by moss and microbes.
• The PV system must be integrated into the Tyndall AFB electrical distribution network busbars as
appropriate and/or into a BESS and include an automatic transfer switch.
• PV system monitoring and reporting system must be included and connected to and compatible with
the Tyndall AFB UOC SCADA system.
• The PV system must include a 7-foot-tall, NEC- and ATFP-compliant security chain-link fencing and
warning signs around the enclosure(s). The security fence must be robust enough to allow installation
and use of optional slats for surface wind reduction. The security fence must have connected
grounding rods every 6 feet of perimeter.
• Using the latest edition of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool from Sandia National Labs, the final
determination for the PV system must be of no impact on aircraft operations.
• Rooftop and carport type designs may also be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Lightning protection for this equipment must adhere to the recommendations and requirements of the
following standards:
• IEEE 142, Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
• IEEE 1410, Guide for Improving the Lightning Performance of Electric Power Overhead
Distribution Lines
• LPI 75, Standard for the Design – Installation – Inspection of Lightning Protection Systems (2017)
• LPI 177, Inspection Guide for Certified Systems
• NFPA 780, Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems
• UFC 3-575-01, Lightning and Static Electricity Protection Systems
Related Government References
The following documents are related to the Solar PV system; this is not an all-inclusive list. These
documents should be considered when developing the design of this system:
• UFGS:
− 26 31 00, Solar Photovoltaics (PV) Components
− 48 14 00, Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Systems
− 09 97 13.27, Exterior Coating of Steel Structures
− 25 50 00.00 20, Cybersecurity of Plant-Related Control Systems
− 26 41 00, Lightning Protection System
DIVISION 48 Chapter 3: Rebuild Technical Guidelines | Final
04 November 2019 247
• UFC:
− 3-440-01, Facility Scale Renewable (2015)
− 3-540-08, Utility Scale Renewable (2017)
− 3-550-01, Exterior Electrical Power Distribution
− 4-010-06, Cybersecurity of Facility-Related Control Systems
Industry Codes and Standards References
The following sections list the Governmental regulations, industry codes and standards, and industry
guidelines used in the development of these criteria. This list may not be all inclusive, and the DBOM
entity is responsible to determine if and what additional regulations, codes, and standards may apply and
follow them in the completion of the detailed design for the project. In addition, authorities having
jurisdiction over the design, construction, and operation of the facility must be identified and adhered to.
These codes and standards set forth the minimum requirements. These may be exceeded by the Bidder
if, in its judgment and with Owner’s acceptance, superior or more economical designs or materials
are available.
The latest edition of the document must apply, unless a specific publication date is noted. The most
severe requirements must prevail in the event of conflict among requirements, specifications, and
applicable and governing codes.
• Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
− IEEE C62.41.1, Guide on the Surges Environment in Low-Voltage (1000V and Less) AC Power
Circuits (2002; R 2008)
− IEEE C62.41.2, Recommended Practice on Characterization of Surges in Low-Voltage (1000V
and Less) AC Power Circuits (2002)
• National Electrical Code/National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
− NEC Article 690
• Underwriters Laboratories
− UL 1449, Standard for Surge Protective Devices
− UL 1741, Standard for Inverters
− UL 1703, Standard for Flat Plate Photovoltaic Modules and Panels
− UL 2703, Standard for Mounting Systems
• National Institute for Standards and Technology
− NIST SP 800-82, Guide to Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Security